Title: The Mysteries of Paris, Volume 1 of 6

Author: Eugène Sue

Illustrators: G. Mercier
              Bicknell
              Léon Poiteau
              Adrian Marcel

Release Date: September 22, 2010 [EBook #33800]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MYSTERIES OF PARIS, V.1 ***




Produced by David Edwards, Christine Aldridge and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
(Stanford University, SUL Books in the Public Domain)





Transcriber's Notes:

1. Passages in italics are surrounded by _underscores_.

2. Passages in Gothic Bold are surrounded by +plus+ signs.

3. Other transcription notes appear at the end of this e-text.




[Illustration: _Portrait of Eugene Sue_
Etching by Bicknell, from a portrait]




+The Mysteries of Paris.+

  _ILLUSTRATED WITH ETCHINGS
  BY MERCIER, BICKNELL, POITEAU,
  AND ADRIAN MARCEL._

                 _BY EUGENE SUE_


      _IN SIX VOLUMES
          VOLUME I._


        _PRINTED FOR
   FRANCIS A. NICCOLLS & CO.
           BOSTON_


      _EDITION DE LUXE._

_Limited to One Thousand Copies._

          No. _____




CONTENTS.


      CHAP.                                                PAGE
          I. THE TAPIS-FRANC                                 11
         II. THE OGRESS                                      19
        III. HISTORY OF LA GOUALEUSE                         31
         IV. THE CHOURINEUR'S HISTORY                        47
          V. THE ARREST                                      59
         VI. THOMAS SEYTON AND THE COUNTESS SARAH            67
        VII. "YOUR MONEY OR YOUR LIFE"                       74
       VIII. THE WALK                                        80
         IX. THE SURPRISE                                    90
          X. CASTLES IN THE AIR                              99
         XI. MURPHY AND RODOLPH                             119
        XII. THE RENDEZVOUS                                 137
       XIII. PREPARATIONS                                   150
        XIV. THE BLEEDING HEART                             157
         XV. THE VAULT                                      166
        XVI. THE SICK-NURSE                                 172
       XVII. THE PUNISHMENT                                 189
      XVIII. THE ISLE ADAM                                  206
        XIX. RECOMPENSE                                     212
         XX. THE DEPARTURE                                  221
        XXI. RESEARCHES                                     225
       XXII. HISTORY OF DAVID AND CECILY                    246
      XXIII. A HOUSE IN THE RUE DU TEMPLE                   258
       XXIV. THE FOUR STORIES                               292
        XXV. TOM AND SARAH                                  302
       XXVI. THE BALL                                       323




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.

                                                           PAGE
      PORTRAIT OF EUGENE SUE                      _Frontispiece_
      THE CHOURINEUR, RODOLPH, AND LA GOUALEUSE              22
      "SHE PROFFERED TO RODOLPH THE BOUQUET"                 89
      "'AH, HERE IS THE DARLING ONE!'"                      158
      "RODOLPH ADDRESSED THE SCHOOLMASTER."                 190
      "THIS INDIVIDUAL WAS SEATED BY THE STOVE"             260
      "'THIS, I SUPPOSE, IS THE WORK OF M. CABRION'"        296




THE MYSTERIES OF PARIS.




CHAPTER I.

THE TAPIS-FRANC.[1]


It was on a cold and rainy night, towards the end of October, 1838, that
a tall and powerful man, with an old broad-brimmed straw hat upon his
head, and clad in a blue cotton carter's frock, which hung loosely over
trousers of the same material, crossed the Pont au Change, and darted
with a hasty step into the Cité, that labyrinth of obscure, narrow, and
winding streets which extends from the Palais de Justice to Notre Dame.

  [1] _Tapis-franc_: literally, a "free carpet;" a low haunt
  equivalent to what in English slang is termed "a boozing ken."

Although limited in space, and carefully watched, this quarter serves as
the lurking-place, or rendezvous, of a vast number of the very dregs of
society in Paris, who flock to the _tapis-franc_. This word, in the
slang of theft and murder, signifies a drinking-shop of the lowest
class. A returned convict, who, in this foul phraseology, is called an
"ogre," or a woman in the same degraded state, who is termed an
"ogress," generally keep such "cribs," frequented by the refuse of the
Parisian population; freed felons, thieves, and assassins are there
familiar guests. If a crime is committed, it is here, in this filthy
sewer, that the police throws its cast-net, and rarely fails to catch
the criminals it seeks to take.

On the night in question, the wind howled fiercely in the dark and dirty
gullies of the Cité; the blinking and uncertain light of the lamps which
swung to and fro in the sudden gusts were dimly reflected in pools of
black slush, which flowed abundantly in the midst of the filthy
pavement.

The murky-coloured houses, which were lighted within by a few panes of
glass in the worm-eaten casements, overhung each other so closely that
the eaves of each almost touched its opposite neighbour, so narrow were
the streets. Dark and noisome alleys led to staircases still more black
and foul, and so perpendicular that they could hardly be ascended by the
help of a cord fixed to the dank and humid walls by holdfasts of iron.

Stalls of charcoal-sellers, fruit-sellers, or venders of refuse meat
occupied the ground floor of some of these wretched abodes.
Notwithstanding the small value of their commodities, the fronts of
nearly all these shops were protected by strong bars of iron,--a proof
that the shopkeepers knew and dreaded the gentry who infested the
vicinity.

The man of whom we have spoken, having entered the Rue aux Fêves, which
is in the centre of the Cité, slackened his pace: he felt he was on his
own soil. The night was dark, and strong gusts of wind, mingled with
rain, dashed against the walls. Ten o'clock struck by the distant dial
of the Palais de Justice. Women were huddled together under the vaulted
arches, deep and dark, like caverns; some hummed popular airs in a low
key; others conversed together in whispers; whilst some, dumb and
motionless, looked on mechanically at the wet, which fell and flowed in
torrents. The man in the carter's frock, stopping suddenly before one of
these creatures, silent and sad as she gazed, seized her by the arm, and
said, "Ha! good evening, La Goualeuse."[2]

  [2] Sweet-throated: in reference to the tone of her voice.

The girl receded, saying, in a faint and fearful tone, "Good evening,
Chourineur.[3] Don't hurt me."

  [3] One who strikes with the knife; the stabber, or slasher.

This man, a liberated convict, had been so named at the hulks.

"Now I have you," said the fellow; "you must pay me the glass of 'tape'
(_eau d'aff_), or I'll make you dance without music," he added, with a
hoarse and brutal laugh.

"Oh, Heaven! I have no money," replied Goualeuse, trembling from head to
foot, for this man was the dread of the district.

"If you're stumped, the ogress of the _tapis-franc_ will give you tick
for your pretty face."

"She won't; I already owe her for the clothes I'm wearing."

"What, you want to shirk it?" shouted the Chourineur, darting after La
Goualeuse, who had hid herself in a gully as murk as midnight.

"Now, then, my lady, I've got you!" said the vagabond, after groping
about for a few moments, and grasping in one of his coarse and powerful
hands a slim and delicate wrist; "and now for the dance I promised you."

"No, it is _you_ who shall dance!" was uttered by a masculine and deep
voice.

"A man! Is't you, Bras Rouge? Speak, why don't you? and don't squeeze so
hard. I am here in the entrance to your 'ken,' and you it must be."

"'Tis not Bras Rouge!" said the voice.

"Oh! isn't it? Well, then, if it is not a friend, why, here goes at
you," exclaimed the Chourineur. "But whose bit of a hand is it I have
got hold of? It must be a woman's!"

"It is the fellow to this," responded the voice.

And under the delicate skin of this hand, which grasped his throat with
sudden ferocity, the Chourineur felt himself held by nerves of iron.
The Goualeuse, who had sought refuge in this alley, and lightly ascended
a few steps, paused for an instant, and said to her unknown defender,
"Thanks, sir, for having taken my part. The Chourineur said he would
strike me because I could not pay for his glass of brandy; but I think
he only jested. Now I am safe, pray let him go. Take care of yourself,
for he is the Chourineur."

"If he be the Chourineur, I am a bully boy who never knuckles down,"
exclaimed the unknown.

All was then silent for a moment, and then were heard for several
seconds, in the midst of the pitchy darkness, sounds of a fierce
struggle.

"Who the devil is this?" then said the ruffian, making a desperate
effort to free himself from his adversary, whose extraordinary power
astonished him. "Now, then, now you shall pay both for La Goualeuse and
yourself!" he shouted, grinding his teeth.

"Pay! yes, I will pay you, but it shall be with my fists; and it shall
be cash in full," replied the unknown.

"If," said the Chourineur, in a stifled voice, "you do but let go my
neckcloth, I will bite your nose off."

"My nose is too small, my lad, and you haven't light enough to see it."

"Come under the 'hanging glim'[4] there."

  [4] Under the lamp, called _reverbère_.

"That I will," replied the unknown, "for then we may look into the
whites of each other's eyes."

He then made a desperate rush at the Chourineur, whom he still held by
the throat, and forced him to the end of the alley, and then thrust him
violently into the street, which was but dimly lighted by the suspended
street-lamp. The bandit stumbled; but, rapidly recovering his feet, he
threw himself furiously upon the unknown, whose slim and graceful form
appeared to belie the possession of the irresistible strength he had
displayed. After a struggle of a few minutes, the Chourineur, although
of athletic build, and a first-rate champion in a species of pugilism
vulgarly termed the _savate_, found that he had got what they call his
master. The unknown threw him twice with immense dexterity, by what is
called, in wrestling, the leg-pass, or crook. Unwilling, however, to
acknowledge the superiority of his adversary, the Chourineur, boiling
with rage, returned again to the charge. Then the defender of La
Goualeuse, suddenly altering his mode of attack, rained on the head and
face of the bandit a shower of blows with his closed fist, as hard and
heavy as if stricken by a steel gauntlet. These blows, worthy of the
admiration of Jem Belcher, Dutch Sam, Tom Cribb, or any other celebrated
English pugilist, were so entirely different from the system of the
_savate_, that the Chourineur dropped like an ox on the pavement,
exclaiming, as he fell, "I'm floored!" (_Mon linge est lavé!_)

"_Mon Dieu! Mon Dieu!_ Have pity on him!" exclaimed La Goualeuse, who,
during the contest, had ventured on the threshold of the alley, adding,
with an air of astonishment, "But who are you, then? Except the
Schoolmaster and Skeleton, there is no one, from the Rue Saint Eloi to
Notre Dame, who can stand against the Chourineur. I thank you very, very
much, sir, for, indeed, I fear that, without your aid, he would have
beaten me."

The unknown, instead of replying, listened with much attention to the
voice of this girl. Perhaps a tone more gentle, sweet, and silvery never
fell on human ear. He endeavoured to examine the features of La
Goualeuse; but the night was too dark, and the beams of the street-lamp
too flickering and feeble. After remaining for some minutes quite
motionless, the Chourineur shook his legs and arms, and then partly rose
from the ground.

"Pray be on your guard!" exclaimed the Goualeuse, retreating again into
the dark passage, and taking her champion by the arm; "take care, or he
will have his revenge on you."

"Don't be frightened, my child; if he has not had enough, I have more
ready for him."

The brigand heard these words.

"Thanks," he murmured; "I'm half throttled, and one eye is closed,--that
is quite enough for one day. Some other time, perhaps, when we may meet
again--"

"What! not content yet,--grumbling still?" said the unknown, with a
menacing tone.

"No, no,--not at all; I do not grumble in the least. You have regularly
served me out,--you are a lad of mettle," said the Chourineur, in a
coarse tone, but still with that sort of deference which physical
superiority always finds in persons of his grade. "You are the better
man, that's clear. Well, except the Skeleton, who seems to have bones of
iron, he is so thin and powerful, and the Schoolmaster, who could eat
three Herculeses for his breakfast, no man living could boast of having
put his foot on my neck."

"Well, and what then?"

"Why, now I have found my master, that's all; you will find yours some
day sooner or later,--everybody does. One thing, however, is certain;
now that you are a better man than the Chourineur, you may 'go your
length' in the Cité. All the women will be your slaves; ogres and
ogresses will give you credit, if it is only for fear; you may be a king
in your way! But who and what are you? You 'patter flash' like a family
man! If you are a 'prig' I'll have nothing to do with you. I have used
the knife, it is true, because, when the blood comes into my eyes, I see
_red_, and I must strike, in spite of myself; but I have paid for my
slashing, by going to the hulks for fifteen years. My time is up, and I
am free from surveillance. I can now live in the capital, without fear
of the 'beaks;' and I have never prigged,--have I, La Goualeuse?"

"No, he was never a thief," said the girl.

"Come along, then, and let us have a glass of something together, and
I'll tell you who I am," said the unknown. "Come, don't let us bear
malice."

"Bear malice! Devil a bit! You are master,--I confess it. You do know
how to handle your fists; I never knew anything like it. Thunder and
lightning! how your thumps fell on my sconce,--I never felt anything
like it. Yours is a new game, and you must teach it to me."

"I will recommence whenever you like."

"Not on me, though, thank ye,--not on me," exclaimed the Chourineur,
laughing; "your blows fell as if from a sledge-hammer; I am still giddy
from them. But do you know Bras Rouge, in whose passage you were?"

"Bras Rouge?" said the unknown, who appeared disagreeably surprised at
the question; adding, however, with an indifferent air, "I do not know
Bras Rouge. Is he the only person who inhabits this abode? It rained in
torrents, and I took shelter in the alley. You meant to beat this poor
girl, and I have thrashed you,--that's all."

"You're right; I have nothing to do with your affairs. Bras Rouge has a
room here, but does not occupy it often. He is usually at his
_estaminet_ in the Champs Elysées. But what's the good of talking about
him?" Then turning to the Goualeuse, "On my word, you are a good wench,
and I would not have beaten you; you know I would not harm a child,--it
was only my joke. Never mind; it was very good of you not to set on this
friend of yours against me when I was down, and at his mercy. Come and
drink with us; he pays for all. By the way, my trump," said he to the
unknown, "what say you, instead of going to tipple, shall we go and have
a crust for supper with the ogress at the White Rabbit? It is a
_tapis-franc_."

"With all my heart. I will pay for the supper. You'll come with us,
Goualeuse?" inquired the unknown.

"Thanks, sir," she replied, "but, after having seen your struggle, it
has made my heart beat so that I have no appetite."

"Pooh! pooh! one shoulder of mutton pokes the other down," said the
Chourineur; "the cookery at the White Rabbit is first-rate."

The three personages then, in perfect amity, bent their steps together
towards the tavern.

During the contest between the Chourineur and the unknown, a
charcoal-seller, of huge size, ensconced in another passage, had
contemplated with much anxiety the progress of the combat, but without
attempting to offer the slightest assistance to either antagonist. When
the unknown, the Chourineur, and the Goualeuse proceeded to the
public-house, the charcoal-man followed them.

The beaten man and the Goualeuse first entered the _tapis-franc_; the
unknown was following, when the charcoal-man accosted him, and said, in
a low voice, in the German language, and in a most respectful tone of
remonstrance, "Pray, your highness, be on your guard."

The unknown shrugged his shoulders, and rejoined his new companion. The
charcoal-dealer did not leave the door of the cabaret, but listened
attentively, and gazed from time to time through a small hole which had
been accidentally made in the thick coat of whitening, with which the
windows of such haunts as these are usually covered on the inside.




CHAPTER II.

THE OGRESS.


The White Rabbit is situated in the centre of the Rue aux Fêves. This
tavern occupies the ground floor of a lofty house, the front of which is
formed by two windows, which are styled "a guillotine." Hanging from the
front of the door leading to a dark and arched passage, was an oblong
lamp, on the cracked panes of which were written, in red letters,
"Nightly Lodgings Here."

The Chourineur, the unknown, and the Goualeuse entered into a large but
low apartment, with the ceiling smoked, and crossed by black rafters,
just visible by the flickering light of a miserable suspended lamp. The
cracked walls, formerly covered with plaster, were now ornamented in
places with coarse drawings, or sentences of flash and obscenity.

The floor, composed of earth beaten together with saltpetre, was thick
with dirt; an armful of straw--an apology for a carpet--was placed at
the foot of the ogress's counter, which was at the right hand of the
door, just beneath the dim lantern.

On each side of this room there were six tables, one end of each of
which was nailed to the wall, as well as the benches on either side of
them. At the farther end was a door leading to a kitchen; on the right,
near the counter, was a passage which led into a den where persons slept
for the night at three halfpence a head.

A few words will describe the ogress and her guests. The lady was called
Mother Ponisse; her triple trade consisted in letting furnished
apartments, keeping a public-house, and _lending_ clothes to the
miserable creatures who infest these foul streets.

The ogress was about forty years of age, bulky, fat, and heavy. She had
a full colour, and strong symptoms of a beard. Her deep voice, her
enormous arms, and coarse hands betokened uncommon strength. She wore on
her cap a large red and yellow handkerchief; a shawl of rabbit-skin was
crossed over her bosom, and tied behind; her woollen gown fell upon
black wooden shoes, scorched almost black by the small stove at which
she warmed her feet; and, to crown her beauty, she had a copper
complexion, which the use of strong liquors had materially tended to
heighten.

The counter, covered with lead, was decked with jugs with iron hoops,
and various pewter measures. In an open cupboard, fastened to the wall,
there were several flasks of glass, so fashioned as to represent the
pedestrian figure of the Emperor. These bottles contained sundry
cordials, red and green in colour, and known by the names of "Drops for
the Brave," "Ratafia of the Column," etc., etc.

A large black cat, with green eyes, was sitting near the ogress, and
seemed the familiar demon of the place. Then, in strange contrast, a
holy branch of boxwood, bought at church by the ogress, was suspended at
the back of an old cuckoo clock.

Two marvellously ill-favoured fellows, with unshaven beards, and their
garb all in tatters, hardly tasted of the pitcher of wine before them,
and conversed together in low voices, and with uneasy aspect. One of the
two, very pale and livid, pulled, from time to time, his shabby
skull-cap over his brows, and concealed as much as possible his left
hand, and, even when compelled to use it, he did so with caution.

Further on there was a young man, hardly sixteen years of age, with
beardless chin, and a countenance wan, wrinkled, and heavy, his eye
dull, and his long black hair straggling down his neck. This youthful
rake, the emblem of precocious vice, was smoking a short black pipe. His
back was resting against the wall, and his two hands were in the pockets
of his blouse, and his legs stretched along the bench. He did not cease
smoking for a moment, unless it was to drink from a cannikin of brandy
placed before him.

The other inmates of the _tapis-franc_, men and women, presented no
remarkable characteristics. There was the ferocious or embruted
face,--the vulgar and licentious mirth; but from time to time there was
a deep and dull silence. Such were the guests of the _tapis-franc_ when
the unknown, the Chourineur, and the Goualeuse entered.

These three persons play such important parts in our recital, that we
must put them in relief.

The Chourineur was a man of lofty stature and athletic make, with hair
of a pale brown, nearly white; thick eyebrows, and enormous whiskers of
deep red. The sun's rays, misery, and the severe toil of the galleys had
bronzed his skin to that deep and olive hue which is peculiar to
convicts. In spite of his horrible nickname, his features did not
express ferocity, but a sort of coarse familiarity and irrepressible
audacity. We have said already that the Chourineur was clothed in
trousers and frock of blue cotton, and on his head he had one of those
large straw hats usually worn by workmen in timber-yards, and
barge-emptiers.

The Goualeuse was, perhaps, about sixteen and a half years old. A
forehead, of the purest and whitest, surmounted a face of perfect oval
and angel-like expression; a fringe of eyelids, so long that they curled
slightly, half veiled her large blue eyes, which had a melancholy
expression. The down of early youth graced cheeks lightly coloured with
a scarlet tinge. Her small and rosy mouth, which hardly ever smiled, her
nose, straight, and delicately chiselled, her rounded chin, had, in
their combined expression, a nobility and a sweetness such as we can
only find in the most beautiful of Raphael's portraits. On each side of
her fair temples was a band of hair, of the most splendid auburn hue,
which descended in luxuriant ringlets half way down her cheeks, and was
then turned back behind the ear, a portion of which--ivory shaded with
carnation--was thus visible, and was then lost under the close folds of
a large cotton handkerchief, with blue checks, tied, as it is called,
_en marmotte_. Her graceful neck, of dazzling whiteness, was encircled
by a small necklace of grains of coral. Her gown, of brown stuff, though
much too large, could not conceal a charming form, supple and round as a
cane; a worn-out small orange-coloured shawl, with green fringe, was
crossed over her bosom.

The lovely voice of the Goualeuse had made a strong impression on her
unknown defender, and, in sooth, that voice, so gentle, so deliciously
modulated and harmonious, had an attraction so irresistible that the
horde of villains and abandoned women, in the midst of whom this
unfortunate girl lived, often begged her to sing, and listened to her
with rapture.

The Goualeuse had another name, given, doubtless, to the maiden
sweetness of her countenance,--she was also called Fleur-de-Marie.

The defender of La Goualeuse (we shall call the unknown Rodolph)
appeared about thirty-six years of age; his figure, tall, graceful, and
admirably proportioned, yet did not betoken the astonishing vigour which
he had displayed in his rencounter with the Chourineur.

It would have been difficult to assign a decided character to the
physiognomy of Rodolph. Certain wrinkles in his forehead betokened a man
of meditation; and yet the firm expression of his mouth, the dignified
and bold carriage of the head, assured us of the man of action, whose
physical strength and presence of mind would always command an
ascendancy over the multitude.

[Illustration: _The Chourineur, Rodolph, and La Goualeuse_
Etching by Adrian Marcel, after the drawing by Frank T. Merrill]

In his struggle with the Chourineur, Rodolph had neither betrayed anger
nor hatred. Confident in his own strength, his address, and agility, he
had only shown a contempt for the brute beast which he subdued.

We will finish this bodily picture of Rodolph by saying that his
features, regularly handsome, seemed too beautiful for a man. His eyes
were large, and of a deep hazel, his nose aquiline, his chin rather
projecting, his hair bright chestnut, of the same shade as his eyebrows,
which were strongly arched, and his small moustache, which was fine and
silky. Thanks to the manners and the language which he assumed with so
much ease, Rodolph was exactly like the other guests of the ogress.
Round his graceful neck, as elegantly modelled as that of the Indian
Bacchus, he wore a black cravat, carelessly tied, the ends of which fell
on the collar of his blue blouse. A double row of nails decorated his
heavy shoes, and, except that his hands were of most aristocratic shape,
nothing distinguished him from the other guests of the _tapis-franc_;
though, in a moral sense, his resolute air, and what we may term his
bold serenity, placed an immense distance between them.

On entering the _tapis-franc_, the Chourineur, laying one of his heavy
hands on the shoulders of Rodolph, cried, "Hail the conqueror of the
Chourineur! Yes, my boys, this springald has floored me; and if any
young gentleman wishes to have his ribs smashed, or his 'nob in
Chancery,' even including the Schoolmaster and the Skeleton, here is
their man; I will answer for him, and back him!"

At these words, all present, from the ogress to the lowest ruffian of
the _tapis-franc_, contemplated the victor of the Chourineur with
respect and fear. Some, moving their glasses and jugs to the end of the
table at which they were seated, offered Rodolph a seat, if he were
inclined to sit near them; others approached the Chourineur, and asked
him, in a low voice, for the particulars of this unknown, who had made
his entrance into their world in so striking a manner.

Then the ogress, accosting Rodolph with one of her most gracious
smiles,--a thing unheard of, and almost deemed fabulous, in the annals
of the White Rabbit,--rose from the bar to take the orders of her guest,
and know what he desired to have for the refreshment of his party,--an
attention which she did not evince either to the Schoolmaster or the
Skeleton, two fearful ruffians, who made even the Chourineur tremble.

One of the men with the villainous aspect, whom we have before described
as being very pale, hiding his left hand, and continually pulling his
cap over his brows, leaned towards the ogress, who was carefully wiping
the table where Rodolph had taken his seat, and said to her, in a hoarse
tone, "Hasn't the Gros-Boiteux been here to-day?"

"No," said Mother Ponisse.

"Nor yesterday?"

"Yes, he came yesterday."

"Was Calebasse with him,--the daughter of Martial, who was guillotined?
You know whom I mean,--the Martials of the Ile de Ravageur?"

"What! do you take me for a spy, with your questions? Do you think I
watch my customers?" said the ogress, in a brutal tone.

"I have an appointment to-night with the Gros-Boiteux and the
Schoolmaster," replied the fellow; "we have some business together."

"That's your affair,--a set of ruffians, as you are, altogether."

"Ruffians!" said the man, much incensed; "it is such ruffians you get
your living by."

"Will you hold your jaw?" said the Amazon, with a threatening gesture,
and lifting, as she spoke, the pitcher she held in her hand.

The man resumed his place, grumbling as he did so.

"The Gros-Boiteux has, perhaps, stayed to give that young fellow
Germain, who lives in the Rue du Temple, his gruel," said he, to his
companion.

"What, do they mean to _do_ for him?"

"No, not quite, but to make him more careful in future. It appears he
has 'blown the gaff' in the job at Nantes, so Bras Rouge declares."

"Why, that is Gros-Boiteux's affair; he has only just left prison, and
has his hands full already."

Fleur-de-Marie had followed the Chourineur into the tavern of the
ogress, and he, responding to a nod given to him by the young scamp with
the jaded aspect, said, "Ah, Barbillon! what, pulling away at the old
stuff?"

"Yes; I would rather fast, and go barefoot any day, than be without my
drops for my throttle, and the weed for my pipe," said the rapscallion,
in a thick, low, hoarse voice, without moving from his seat, and puffing
out volumes of tobacco-smoke.

"Good evening, Fleur-de-Marie," said the ogress, looking with a prying
eye on the clothes of the poor girl,--clothes which she had lent her.
After her scrutiny, she said, in a tone of coarse satisfaction, "It's
really a pleasure--so it is--to lend one's good clothes to you; you are
as clean as a kitten, or else I would never have trusted you with that
shawl. Such a beauty as that orange one is, I would never have trusted
it to such gals as Tourneuse and Boulotte; but I have taken every care
_on_ you ever since you came here six weeks ago; and, if the truth must
be said, there is not a tidier nor more nicer girl than you in all the
Cité; that there ain't; though you be al'ays so sad like, and too
particular."

The Goualeuse sighed, turned her head, and said nothing.

"Why, mother," said Rodolph to the old hag, "you have got some holy
boxwood, I see, over your cuckoo," and he pointed with his finger to the
consecrated bough behind the old clock.

"Why, you heathen, would you have us live like dogs?" replied the
ogress. Then addressing Fleur-de-Marie, she added, "Come, now,
Goualeuse, tip us one of your pretty little ditties" (_goualantes_).

"Supper, supper first, Mother Ponisse," said the Chourineur.

"Well, my lad of wax, what can I do for you?" said the ogress to
Rodolph, whose good-will she was desirous to conciliate, and whose
support she might, perchance, require.

"Ask the Chourineur; he orders, I pay."

"Well, then," said the ogress, turning to the bandit, "what will you
have for supper, you 'bad lot?'"

"Two quarts of the best wine, at twelve sous, three crusts of wheaten
bread, and a harlequin,"[5] said the Chourineur, after considering for a
few moments what he should order.

  [5] A "harlequin" is a collection of odds and ends of fish,
  flesh, and fowl, after they come from table, which the Parisian,
  providing for the class to which the Chourineur belongs, finds a
  profitable and popular composition.

"Ah! you are a dainty dog, I know, and as fond as ever of them
harlequins."

"Well, now, Goualeuse," said the Chourineur, "are you hungry?"

"No, Chourineur."

"Would you like anything better than a harlequin, my lass?" said
Rodolph.

"No, I thank you; I have no appetite."

"Come, now," said the Chourineur, with a brutal grin, "look my master in
the face like a jolly wench. You have no objection, I suppose?"

The poor girl blushed, and did not look at Rodolph. A few moments
afterwards, and the ogress herself placed on the table a pitcher of
wine, bread, and a harlequin, of which we will not attempt to give an
idea to the reader, but which appeared most relishing to the Chourineur;
for he exclaimed, "_Dieu de Dieu!_ what a dish! What a glorious dish! It
is a regular omnibus; there is something in it to everybody's taste.
Those who like fat can have it; so can they who like lean; as well as
those who prefer sugar, and those who choose pepper. There's tender bits
of chicken, biscuit, sausage, tarts, mutton-bones, pastry crust, fried
fish, vegetables, woodcock's heads, cheese, and salad. Come, eat,
Goualeuse, eat; it is so capital! You have been to a wedding breakfast
somewhere this morning."

"No more than on other mornings. I ate this morning, as usual, my
ha'porth of milk, and my ha'porth of bread."

The entrance of another personage into the cabaret interrupted all
conversation for a moment, and everybody turned his head in the
direction of the newcomer, who was a middle-aged man, active and
powerful, wearing a loose coat and cap. He was evidently quite at home
in the _tapis-franc_, and, in language familiar to all the guests,
requested to be supplied with supper. He was so placed that he could
observe the two ill-looking scoundrels who had asked after Gros-Boiteux
and the Schoolmaster. He did not take his eyes off them; but in
consequence of their position, they could not see that they were the
objects of such marked and constant attention.

The conversation, momentarily interrupted, was resumed. In spite of his
natural audacity, the Chourineur showed a deference for Rodolph, and
abstained from familiarity.

"By Jove," said he to Rodolph, "although I have smarted for it, yet I am
very glad to have met with you."

"What! because you relish the harlequin?"

"Why, may be so; but more because I am all on the fret to see you
'serve out' the Schoolmaster. To see him who has always crowed over me,
crowed over in his turn would do me good."

"Do you suppose, then, that for your amusement I mean to spring at the
Schoolmaster, and pin him like a bull-dog?"

"No, but he'll have at you in a moment, when he learns that you are a
better man than he," replied the Chourineur, rubbing his hands.

"Well, I have coin enough left to pay him in full," said Rodolph, in a
careless tone; "but it is horrible weather: what say you to a cup of
brandy with sugar in it?"

"That's the ticket!" said the Chourineur.

"And, that we may be better acquainted, we will tell each other who we
are," added Rodolph.

"The Albinos called the Chourineur a freed convict, worker at the wood
that floats at St. Paul's Quay; frozen in the winter, scorched in the
summer, from twelve to fifteen hours a day in the water; half man, half
frog; that's my description," said Rodolph's companion, making him a
military salute with his left hand. "Well, now, and you, my master, this
is your first appearance in the Cité. I don't mean anything to offend;
but you entered head foremost against my skull, and beating the drum on
my carcass. By all that's ugly, what a rattling you made, especially
with these blows with which you doubled me up! I never can forget
them--thick as buttons--what a torrent! But you have some trade besides
'polishing off' the Chourineur?"

"I am a fan-painter, and my name is Rodolph."

"A fan-painter! Ah! that's the reason, then, that your hands are so
white," added the Chourineur. "If all your fellow workmen are like you,
there must be a tidy lot of you. But, as you are a workman, what brings
you to a _tapis-franc_ in the Cité, where there are only prigs,
cracksmen or freed convicts like myself, and who only come here because
we cannot go elsewhere? This is no place for you. Honest mechanics have
their coffee-shops, and don't talk slang."

"I come here because I like good company."

"Gammon!" said the Chourineur, shaking his head with an air of doubt. "I
found you in the passage of Bras Rouge. Well, man, never mind. You say
you don't know him?"

"What do you mean with all your nonsense about your Bras Rouge? Let him
go to the--"

"Stay, master of mine. You, perhaps, distrust me; but you are wrong, and
if you like I will tell you my history; but that is on condition that
you teach me how to give those precious thumps which settled my business
so quickly. What say you?"

"I agree, Chourineur; tell me your story, and Goualeuse will also tell
hers."

"Very well," replied the Chourineur; "it is not weather to turn a mangy
cur out-of-doors, and it will be an amusement. Do you agree, Goualeuse?"

"Oh, certainly; but my story is a very short one," said Fleur-de-Marie.

"And you will have to tell us your history, comrade Rodolph," added the
Chourineur.

"Well, then, I'll begin."

"Fan-painter!" said Goualeuse, "what a very pretty trade!"

"And how much can you earn if you stick close to work?" inquired the
Chourineur.

"I work by the piece," responded Rodolph; "my good days are worth three
francs, sometimes four, in summer, when the days are long."

"And you are idle sometimes, you rascal?"

"Yes, as long as I have money, though I do not waste it. First, I pay
ten sous for my night's lodging."

"Your pardon, monseigneur; you sleep, then, at ten sous, do you?" said
the Chourineur, raising his hand to his cap.

The word monseigneur, spoken ironically by the Chourineur, caused an
almost imperceptible smile on the lips of Rodolph, who replied, "Oh, I
like to be clean and comfortable."

"Here's a peer of the realm for you! a man with mines of wealth!"
exclaimed the Chourineur; "he pays ten sous for his bed!"

"Well, then," continued Rodolph, "four sous for tobacco; that makes
fourteen sous; four sous for breakfast, eighteen; fifteen sous for
dinner; one or two sous for brandy; that all comes to about thirty-four
or thirty-five sous a day. I have no occasion to work all the week, and
so the rest of the time I amuse myself."

"And your family?" said the Goualeuse.

"Dead," replied Rodolph.

"Who were your friends?" asked the Goualeuse.

"Dealers in old clothes and marine stores under the pillars of the
market-place."

"How did you spend what they left you?" inquired the Chourineur.

"I was very young, and my guardian sold the stock; and, when I came of
age, he brought me in his debtor for thirty francs; that was my
inheritance."

"And who is now your employer?" the Chourineur demanded.

"His name is Gauthier, in the Rue des Bourdonnais, a
beast--brute--thief--miser! He would almost as soon lose the sight of an
eye as pay his workmen. Now this is as true a description as I can give
you of him; so let's have done with him. I learned my trade under him
from the time when I was fifteen years of age; I have a good number in
the Conscription, and my name is Rodolph Durand. My history is told."

"Now it's your turn, Goualeuse," said the Chourineur; "I keep my history
till last, as a _bonne bouche_."




CHAPTER III.

HISTORY OF LA GOUALEUSE.


"Let us begin at the beginning," said the Chourineur.

"Yes; your parents?" added Rodolph.

"I never knew them," said Fleur-de-Marie.

"The deuce!" said the Chourineur. "Well, that is odd, Goualeuse! you and
I are of the same family."

"What! you, too, Chourineur?"

"An orphan of the streets of Paris like you, my girl."

"Then who brought you up, Goualeuse?" asked Rodolph.

"I don't know, sir. As far back as I can remember--I was, I think, about
six or seven years old--I was with an old one-eyed woman, whom they call
the Chouette,[6] because she had a hooked nose, a green eye quite round,
and was like an owl with one eye out."

  [6] The Screech-owl.

"Ha! ha! ha! I think I see her, the old night-bird!" shouted the
Chourineur, laughing.

"The one-eyed woman," resumed Fleur-de-Marie, "made me sell barley-sugar
in the evenings on the Pont Neuf; but that was only an excuse for asking
charity; and when I did not bring her in at least ten sous, the Chouette
beat me instead of giving me any supper."

"Are you sure the woman was not your mother?" inquired Rodolph.

"Quite sure; for she often scolded me for being fatherless and
motherless, and said she picked me up one day in the street."

"So," said the Chourineur, "you had a dance instead of a meal, if you
did not pick up ten sous?"

"Yes. And after that I went to lie down on some straw spread on the
ground; when I was cold--very cold."

"I do not doubt it, for the feather of beans (straw) is a very cold sort
of stuff," said the Chourineur. "A dung-heap is twice as good; but then
people don't like your smell, and say, 'Oh, the blackguard! where has he
been?'"

This remark made Rodolph smile, whilst Fleur-de-Marie thus continued:
"Next day the one-eyed woman gave me a similar allowance for breakfast
as for supper, and sent me to Montfauçon to get some worms to bait for
fish; for in the daytime the Chouette kept her stall for selling
fishing-lines, near the bridge of Notre Dame. For a child of seven years
of age, who is half dead with hunger and cold, it is a long way from the
Rue de la Mortellerie to Montfauçon."

"But exercise has made you grow as straight as an arrow, my girl; you
have no reason to complain of that," said the Chourineur, striking a
light for his pipe.

"Well," said the Goualeuse, "I returned very, very tired; then, at noon,
the Chouette gave me a little bit of bread."

"Ah, eating so little has kept your figure as fine as a needle, girl;
you must not find fault with that," said Chourineur, puffing out a cloud
of tobacco-smoke. "But what ails you, comrade--I mean, Master Rodolph?
You seem quite down like; are you sorry for the girl and her miseries?
Ah, we all have, and have had, our miseries!"

"Yes, but not such miseries as mine, Chourineur," said Fleur-de-Marie.

"What! not I, Goualeuse? Why, my lass, you were a queen to me! At least,
when you were little you slept on straw and ate bread; I passed my most
comfortable nights in the lime-kilns at Clichy, like a regular vagabond;
I fed on cabbage-stumps and other refuse vegetables, which I picked up
when and where I could; but very often, as it was so far to the
lime-kilns at Clichy, and I was tired after my work, I slept under the
large stones at the Louvre; and then, in winter, I had white
sheets,--that is, whenever the snow fell."

"A man is stronger; but a poor little girl--" said Fleur-de-Marie. "And
yet, with all that, I was as plump as a skylark."

"What! you remember that, eh?"

"To be sure I do. When the Chouette beat me I fell always at the first
blow; then she stamped upon me, screaming out, 'Ah, the nasty little
brute! she hasn't a farden's worth of strength,--she can't stand even
two thumps!' And then she called me Pegriotte (little thief). I never
had any other name,--that was my baptismal name."

"Like me. I had the baptism of a dog in a ditch, and they called me
'Fellow,' or 'You, sir,' or 'Albino.' It is really surprising, my wench,
how much we resemble each other!" said the Chourineur.

"That's true,--in our misery," said Fleur-de-Marie, who addressed
herself to the Chourineur almost always, feeling, in spite of herself, a
sort of shame at the presence of Rodolph, hardly venturing to raise her
eyes to him, although in appearance he belonged to that class with whom
she ordinarily lived.

"And when you had fetched the worms for the Chouette, what did you do?"
inquired the Chourineur.

"Why, she made me beg until night; then, in the evening, she went to
sell fried fish on the Pont Neuf. Oh, dear! at that time it was a long
while to wait for my morsel of bread; and if I dared to ask the Chouette
for something to eat, she beat me and said, 'Get ten sous, and then you
shall have your supper.' Then I, being very hungry, and as she hurt me
very much, cried with a very full heart and sore body. The Chouette tied
my little basket of barley-sugar round my neck, and stationed me on the
Pont Neuf, where, in winter, I was frozen to death. Yet sometimes, in
spite of myself, I slept as I stood,--but not long; for the Chouette
kicked me until I awoke. I remained on the bridge till eleven o'clock,
my stock of barley-sugar hanging round my neck, and often crying
heartily. The passengers, touched by my tears, sometimes gave me a sou;
and then I gained ten and sometimes fifteen sous, which I gave to the
Chouette, who searched me all over, and even looked in my mouth, to see
if I had kept back anything."

"Well, fifteen sous was a good haul for a little bird like you."

"It was. And then the one-eyed woman seeing that--"

"With her one eye?" said the Chourineur, laughing.

"Of course, because she had but one. Well, then, she finding that when I
cried I got most money, always beat me severely before she put me on the
bridge."

"Brutal, but cunning."

"Well, at last I got hardened to blows; and as the Chouette got in a
passion when I did not cry, why I, to be revenged upon her, the more she
thumped me the more I laughed, although the tears came into my eyes with
the pain."

"But, poor Goualeuse, did not the sticks of barley-sugar make you long
for them?"

"Ah, yes, Chourineur; but I never tasted them. It was my ambition, and
my ambition ruined me. One day, returning from Montfauçon, some little
boys beat me and stole my basket. I came back, well knowing what was in
store for me; and I had a shower of thumps and no bread. In the evening,
before going to the bridge, the Chouette, savage because I had not
brought in anything the evening before, instead of beating me as usual
to make me cry, made me bleed by pulling my hair from the sides of the
temples, where it is most tender."

"_Tonnerre!_ that was coming it too strong," said the bandit, striking
his fist heavily on the table, and frowning sternly. "To beat a child is
no such great thing, but to ill-use one so--Heaven and earth!"

Rodolph had listened attentively to the recital of Fleur-de-Marie, and
now looked at the Chourineur with astonishment: the display of such
feeling quite surprised him.

"What ails you, Chourineur?" he inquired.

"What ails me? Ails me? Why, have you no feeling? That devil's dam of a
Chouette who so brutally used this girl! Are you as hard as your own
fists?"

"Go on, my girl," said Rodolph to Fleur-de-Marie, without appearing to
notice the Chourineur's appeal.

"I have told you how the Chouette ill-used me to make me cry. I was then
sent on to the bridge with my barley-sugar. The one-eyed was at her
usual spot, and from time to time shook her doubled fist at me. However,
as I had not broken my fast since the night before, and as I was very
hungry, at the risk of putting the Chouette in a passion, I took a piece
of barley-sugar, and began to eat it."

"Well done, girl!"

"I ate another piece--"

"Bravo! go it, my hearties!"

"I found it so good, not from daintiness, but real hunger. But then a
woman, who sold oranges, cried out to the one-eyed woman, 'Look ye
there, Chouette; Pegriotte is eating the barley-sugar!'"

"Oh, thunder and lightning!" said the Chourineur; "that would enrage
her,--make her in a passion! Poor little mouse, what a fright you were
in when the Chouette saw you!--eh?"

"How did you get out of that affair, poor Goualeuse?" asked Rodolph,
with as much interest as the Chourineur.

"Why, it was a serious matter to me,--but that was afterwards; for the
Chouette, although boiling over with rage at seeing me devour the
barley-sugar, could not leave her stove, for the fish was frying."

"Ha! ha! ha! True, true,--that was a difficult position for her," said
the Chourineur, laughing heartily.

"At a distance, the Chouette threatened me with her long iron fork; but
when her fish was cooked, she came towards me. I had only collected
three sous, and I had eaten six sous' worth. She did not say a word, but
took me by the hand and dragged me away with her. At this moment, I do
not know how it was that I did not die on the spot with fright. I
remember it as well as if it was this very moment,--it was very near to
New Year's day, and there were a great many shops on the Pont Neuf, all
filled with toys, and I had been looking at them all the evening with
the greatest delight,--beautiful dolls, little furnished houses,--you
know how very amusing such things are for a child."

"You had never had any playthings, had you, Goualeuse?" asked the
Chourineur.

"I? _Mon Dieu!_ who was there to give me any playthings?" said the girl,
in a sad tone. "Well, the evening passed. Although it was in the depth
of winter, I only had on a little cotton gown, no stockings, no shift,
and with wooden shoes on my feet: that was not enough to stifle me with
heat, was it? Well, when the old woman took my hand, I burst out into a
perspiration from head to foot. What frightened me most was, that,
instead of swearing and storming as usual, she only kept on grumbling
between her teeth. She never let go my hand, but made me walk so
fast--so very fast--that I was obliged to run to keep up with her, and
in running I had lost one of my wooden shoes; and as I did not dare to
say so, I followed her with one foot naked on the bare stones. When we
reached home it was covered with blood."

"A one-eyed old devil's kin!" said the Chourineur, again thumping the
table in his anger. "It makes my heart quite cold to think of the poor
little thing trotting along beside that cursed old brute, with her poor
little foot all bloody!"

"We lived in a garret in the Rue de la Montellerie; beside the entrance
to our alley there was a dram-shop, and there the Chouette went in,
still dragging me by the hand. She then had a half pint of brandy at the
bar."

"The deuce! Why, I could not drink that without being quite fuddled!"

"It was her usual quantity; perhaps that was the reason why she beat me
of an evening. Well, at last we got up into our cock-loft; the Chouette
double-locked the door; I threw myself on my knees, and asked her pardon
for having eaten the barley-sugar. She did not answer me, but I heard
her mumbling to herself, as she walked about the room, 'What shall I do
this evening to this little thief, who has eaten all that barley-sugar?
Ah, I see!' And she looked at me maliciously with her one green eye. I
was still on my knees, when she suddenly went to a shelf and took down a
pair of pincers."

"Pincers!" exclaimed the Chourineur.

"Yes, pincers."

"What for?"

"To strike you?" inquired Rodolph.

"To pinch you?" said the Chourineur.

"No, no," answered the poor girl, trembling at the very recollection.

"To pull out your hair?"

"No; to take out one of my teeth."

The Chourineur uttered a blasphemous oath, accompanied with such furious
imprecations that all the guests in the _tapis-franc_ looked at him with
astonishment.

"Why, what is the matter with you?" asked Rodolph.

"The matter! the matter! I'll skin her alive, that infernal old hag, if
I can catch her! Where is she? Tell me, where is she? Let me find her,
and I'll throttle the old--"

"And did she really take out your tooth, my poor child,--that wretched
monster in woman's shape?" demanded Rodolph, whilst the Chourineur was
venting his rage in a volley of the most violent reproaches.

"Yes, sir; but not at the first pull. How I suffered! She held me with
my head between her knees, where she held it as if in a vice. Then, half
with her pincers, half with her fingers, she pulled out my tooth, and
then said, 'Now I will pull out one every day, Pegriotte; and when you
have not a tooth left I will throw you into the river, and the fish
shall eat you.'"

"The old devil! To break and pull out a poor child's teeth in that way!"
exclaimed the Chourineur, with redoubled fury.

"And how did you escape her then?" inquired Rodolph of the Goualeuse.

"Next day, instead of going to Montfauçon, I went on the side of the
Champs Elysées, so frightened was I of being drowned by the Chouette. I
would have run to the end of the world, rather than be again in the
Chouette's hands. After walking and walking, I fairly lost myself; I had
not begged a farthing, and the more I thought the more frightened did I
become. At night I hid myself in a timber-yard, under some piles of
wood. As I was very little, I was able to creep under an old door and
hide myself amongst a heap of logs. I was so hungry that I tried to gnaw
a piece of the bark, but I could not bite it,--it was too hard. At
length I fell asleep. In the morning, hearing a noise, I hid myself
still further back in the wood-pile. It was tolerably warm, and, if I
had had something to eat, I could not have been better off for the
winter."

"Like me in the lime-kiln."

"I did not dare to quit the timber-yard, for I fancied that the Chouette
would seek for me everywhere, to pull out my teeth and drown me, and
that she would be sure to catch me if I stirred from where I was."

"Stay, do not mention that old beast's name again,--it makes the blood
come into my eyes! The fact is, that you have known misery,--bitter,
bitter misery. Poor little mite! how sorry I am that I threatened to
beat you just now, and frightened you. As I am a man, I did not mean to
do it."

"Why, would you not have beaten me? I have no one to defend me."

"That's the very reason, because you are not like the others,--because
you have no one to take your part,--that I would not have beaten you.
When I say no one, I do not mean our comrade Rodolph; but his coming was
a chance, and he certainly did give me my full allowance when we met."

"Go on, my child," said Rodolph. "How did you get away from the
timber-yard?"

"Next day, about noon, I heard a great dog barking under the wood-pile.
I listened, and the bark came nearer and nearer; then a deep voice
exclaimed, 'My dog barks,--somebody is hid in the yard!' 'They are
thieves,' said another voice; and the men then began to encourage the
dog, and cry, 'Find 'em! find 'em, lad!' The dog ran to me, and, for
fear of being bitten, I began to cry out with all my might and main.
'Hark!' said one of them; 'I hear the cry of a child.' They called back
the dog; I came out from the pile of wood, and saw a gentleman and a man
in a blouse. 'Ah, you little thief! what are you doing in my
timber-yard?' said the gentleman, in a cross tone. I put my hands
together and said, 'Don't hurt me, pray. I have had nothing to eat for
two days, and I've run away from the Chouette, who pulled out my tooth,
and said she would throw me over to the fishes. Not knowing where to
sleep, I was passing before your door, and I slept for the night
amongst these logs, under this heap, not thinking I hurt anybody.'

"'I'm not to be gammoned by you, you little hussy! You came to steal my
logs. Go and call the watch,' said the timber-merchant to his man."

"Ah, the old vagabond! The old reprobate! Call the watch! Why didn't he
send for the artillery?" said the Chourineur. "Steal his logs, and you
only eight years old! What an old ass!"

"'Not true, sir,' his man replied. 'Steal your logs, master! How can she
do that? She is not so big as the smallest piece!' 'You are right,'
replied the timber-merchant; 'but if she does not come for herself, she
does for others. Thieves have a parcel of children, whom they send to
pry about and hide themselves to open the doors of houses. She must be
taken to the commissary, and mind she does not escape.'"

"Upon my life, this timber-merchant was more of a log than any log in
his own yard," said the Chourineur.

"I was taken to the commissary," resumed Goualeuse. "I accused myself of
being a wanderer, and they sent me to prison. I was sent before the
Tribunal, and sentenced, as a rogue and vagabond, to remain until I was
sixteen years of age in a house of correction. I thank the judges much
for their kindness; for in prison I had food, I was not beaten, and it
was a paradise after the cock-loft of the Chouette. Then, in prison I
learned to sew; but, sad to say, I was idle: I preferred singing to
work, and particularly when I saw the sun shine. Ah, when the sun shone
on the walls of the prison I could not help singing; and then, when I
could sing, I seemed no longer to be a prisoner. It was after I began to
sing so much that they called me Goualeuse, instead of Pegriotte. Well,
when I was sixteen, I left the gaol. At the door, I found the ogress
here, and two or three old women, who had come to see my fellow
prisoners, and who had always told me that when I left the prison they
would find work for me."

"Yes, yes, I see," said the Chourineur.

"'My pretty little maid,' said the ogress and her old companions, 'come
and lodge with us; we will give you good clothes, and then you may amuse
yourself.' I didn't like them, and refused, saying to myself, 'I know
how to sew very well, and I have two hundred francs in hand. I have been
eight years in prison, I should like to enjoy myself a bit,--that won't
hurt anybody; work will come when the money is spent.' And so I began to
spend my two hundred francs. Ah, that was my mistake," added
Fleur-de-Marie, with a sigh. "I ought first to have got my work; but I
hadn't a soul on earth to advise me. At sixteen, to be thrown on the
city of Paris, as I was, one is so lonely; and what is done is done. I
have done wrong, and I have suffered for it. I began then to spend my
money: first, I bought flowers to put in my room,--I do love
flowers!--then I bought a gown, a nice shawl, and I took a walk in the
Bois de Boulogne, and I went to St. Germains, Vincennes, and other
country places. Oh, how I love the country!"

"With a lover by your side, my girl?" asked the Chourineur.

"Oh, _mon Dieu!_ no! I like to be my own mistress. I had my little
excursions with a friend who was in prison with me,--a good little girl
as can be: they call her Rigolette, because she is always laughing."

"Rigolette! Rigolette! I don't know her," said the Chourineur, who
appeared to be appealing to his memory.

"I didn't think you knew her. I am sure Rigolette was very well behaved
in prison, and always so gay and so industrious, she took out with her
when she left the prison at least four hundred francs that she had
earned. And then she is so particular!--you should see her! When I say I
had no one to advise me, I am wrong: I ought to have listened to her;
for, after having had a week's amusement together, she said to me, 'Now
we have had such a holiday, we ought to try for work, and not spend our
money in waste.' I, who was so happy in the fields and the woods,--it
was just at the end of spring, this year,--I answered, 'Oh, I must be
idle a little longer, and then I will work hard.' Since that time I have
not seen Rigolette, but I heard a few days since that she was living
near the Temple,--that she was a famous needlewoman, and earned at least
twenty-five sous a-day, and has a small workroom of her own; but now I
could not for the world see her again,--I should die with shame if I met
her."

"So, then, my poor girl," said Rodolph, "you spent your money in the
country,--you like the country, do you?"

"Like it? I love it! Oh, what would I not give to live there? Rigolette,
on the contrary, prefers Paris, and likes to walk on the Boulevards; but
she is so nice and so kind, she went into the country only to please
me."

"And you did not even leave yourself a few sous to live upon whilst you
found work?" said the Chourineur.

"Yes, I had reserved about fifty francs; but it happened that I had for
my washerwoman a woman called Lorraine, a poor thing, with none but the
good God to protect her. She was then very near her confinement, and yet
was obliged all day long to be with her hands and feet in her
washing-tubs. She fell sick, and, not being able to work, applied for
admittance to a lying-in hospital, but there was no room. She could not
work, and her time was very near at hand, and she had not a son to pay
for the bed in a garret, from which they drove her. Fortunately, she met
one day, at the end of the Pont Notre-Dame, with Goubin's wife, who had
been hiding for four days in a cellar of a house which was being pulled
down behind the Hôtel Dieu--"

"But why was Goubin's wife hiding?"

"To escape from her husband, who threatened to kill her; and she only
went out at night to buy some bread, and it was then she met with the
poor Lorraine, ill, and hardly able to drag herself along, for she was
expecting to be brought to bed every hour. Well, it seems this Goubin's
wife took her to the cellar where she was hiding,--it was just a
shelter, and no more. There she shared her bread and straw with the poor
Lorraine, who was confined in this cellar of a poor little infant; her
only covering and bed was straw! Well, it seems that Goubin's wife could
not bear it, and so, going out at all risks, even of being killed by her
husband, who was looking for her everywhere, she left the cellar in open
day, and came to me. She knew I had still a little money left, and that
I could assist her if I would; so, when Helmina had told me all about
poor Lorraine, who was obliged to lie with her new-born babe on straw, I
told her to bring them both to my room at once, and I would take a
chamber for her next to mine. This I did; and, oh, how happy she was,
poor Lorraine, when she found herself in a bed, with her babe beside her
in a little couch which I had bought for her! Helmina and I nursed her
until she was able to get about again, and then, with the rest of my
money, I enabled her to return to her washing-tubs."

"And when all your money was spent on Lorraine and her infant, what did
you do, my child?" inquired Rodolph.

"I looked out for work; but it was too late. I can sew very well, I have
good courage, and thought that I had only to ask for work and get it.
Ah! how I deceived myself! I went into a shop where they sell ready-made
linen, and asked for employment, and as I would not tell a story, I said
I had just left prison. They showed me the door, without making me any
answer. I begged they would give me a trial, and they pushed me into the
street as if I had been a thief. Then I remembered, too late, what
Rigolette had told me. Little by little I sold my small stock of clothes
and linen, and when all was gone they turned me out of my lodging. I had
not tasted food for two days; I did not know where to sleep. At this
moment I met the ogress and one of her old women who knew where I
lodged, and was always coming about me since I left prison. They told me
they would find me work, and I believed them. I went with them, so
exhausted for want of food that my senses were gone. They gave me brandy
to drink, and--and--here I am!" said the unhappy creature, hiding her
face in her hands.

"Have you lived a long time with the ogress, my poor girl?" asked
Rodolph, in accents of the deepest compassion.

"Six weeks, sir," replied Goualeuse, shuddering as she spoke.

"I see,--I see," said the Chourineur; "I know you now as well as if I
were your father and mother, and you had never left my lap. Well, well,
this is a confession indeed!"

"It makes you sad, my girl, to tell the story of your life," said
Rodolph.

"Alas! sir," replied Fleur-de-Marie, sorrowfully, "since I was born this
is the first time it ever happened to me to recall all these things at
once, and my tale is not a merry one."

"Well," said the Chourineur, ironically, "you are sorry, perhaps, that
you are not a kitchen-wench in a cook-shop, or a servant to some old
brutes who think of no one but themselves."

"Ah!" said Fleur-de-Marie, with a deep sigh, "to be quite happy, we must
be quite virtuous."

"Oh, what is your little head about now?" exclaimed the Chourineur, with
a loud burst of laughter. "Why not count your rosary in honour of your
father and mother, whom you never knew?"

"My father and mother abandoned me in the street like a puppy that is
one too many in the house; perhaps they had not enough to feed
themselves," said Goualeuse, with bitterness. "I want nothing of
them,--I complain of nothing,--but there are lots happier than mine."

"Yours! Why, what would you have? You are as handsome as a Venus, and
yet only sixteen and a half; you sing like a nightingale, behave
yourself very prettily, are called Fleur-de-Marie, and yet you complain!
What will you say, I should like to know, when you will have a stove
under your 'paddlers,' and a chinchilla boa, like the ogress?"

"Oh, I shall never be so old as she is."

"Perhaps you have a charm for never growing any older?"

"No; but I could not lead such a life. I have already a bad cough."

"Ah, I see you already in the 'cold-meat box.' Go along, you silly
child, you!"

"Do you often have such thoughts as these, Goualeuse?" said Rodolph.

"Sometimes. You, perhaps, M. Rodolph, understand me. In the morning,
when I go to buy my milk from the milkwoman at the corner of Rue de la
Vieille-Draperie, with the sous which the ogress gives me, and see her
go away in her little cart drawn by her donkey, I do envy her so, and I
say to myself, 'She is going into the country, to the pure air, to her
home and her family;' and then I return alone into the garret of the
ogress, where you cannot see plainly even at noonday."

"Well, child, be good--laugh at your troubles--be good," said the
Chourineur.

"Good! _mon Dieu!_ and how do you mean be good? The clothes I wear
belong to the ogress, and I am in debt to her for my board and lodging.
I can't stir from her; she would have me taken up as a thief. I belong
to her, and I must pay her."

When she had uttered these last words, the unhappy girl could not help
shuddering, and a tear trembled in her long eyelashes.

"Well, but remain as you are, and do not compare yourself to a country
milkwoman," said the Chourineur. "Are you taking leave of your senses?
Only think, you may yet cut a figure in the capital, whilst the
milkwoman must boil the pot for her brats, milk her cows, gather grass
for her rabbits, and, perhaps, after all, get a black eye from her
husband when he comes home from the pot-house. Why, it is really
ridiculous to hear you talk of envying her."

The Goualeuse did not reply; her eye was fixed, her heart was full, and
the expression of her face was painfully distressed. Rodolph had
listened to the recital, made with so painful a frankness, with deep
interest. Misery, destitution, ignorance of the world, had weighed down
this wretched girl, cast at sixteen years of age on the wide world of
Paris!

Rodolph involuntarily thought of a beloved child whom he had lost,--a
girl, dead at six years of age, and who, had she survived, would have
been, like Fleur-de-Marie, sixteen years and a half old. This
recollection excited the more highly his solicitude for the unhappy
creature whose narration he had just heard.




CHAPTER IV.

THE CHOURINEUR'S HISTORY.


The reader has not forgotten the two guests at the _tapis-franc_ who
were watched so closely by the third individual who had come into the
cabaret. We have said that one of these fellows, who had on a Greek cap,
and concealed his left hand with much care, asked the ogress if the
Schoolmaster and Gros-Boiteux had not arrived.

During the story of the Goualeuse, which they could not overhear, they
had been constantly talking in a very low tone, throwing occasional
hurried glances at the door. He who wore the Greek cap said to his
comrade, "The Gros-Boiteux does not 'show,' nor the Schoolmaster."

"Perhaps the Skeleton has 'done for him,' and made off with the 'swag.'"

"A precious 'go' that would be for us, who 'laid the plant,' and look
out for our 'snacks,'" replied the other.

The newcomer, who observed the two men, was seated too far off to hear a
word they said, but, after having cautiously consulted a small paper
concealed at the bottom of his cap, he appeared satisfied with his
remarks, rose from the table, and said to the ogress, who was sleeping
at the bar, with her feet on the stove, and her great cat on her knee:

"I say, Mother Ponisse, I shall soon be back again; take care of my
pitcher and my plate; I don't want any one to make free with them."

"Make yourself easy, my fine fellow," said Mother Ponisse; "if your
plate and pitcher are empty, no one will touch them."

The newcomer laughed loudly at the joke of the ogress, and then slipped
out, so that his departure was unnoticed. At that moment when this man
retired, and before the door could be shut, Rodolph saw the
charcoal-dealer, whose black face and tall form we have already alluded
to, and he had just time to manifest to him, by an impatient gesture,
how much he disliked his watchful attendance; but the charcoal-man did
not appear to heed this in the least, and still kept hanging about the
_tapis-franc_. The countenance of the Goualeuse became still more
saddened; with her back to the wall, her head drooping on her bosom, her
full blue eyes gazing mechanically about her, the unfortunate being
seemed bowed down with the weight of her oppressive thoughts. Two or
three times, having met Rodolph's fixed look, she turned away, unable to
account to herself for the singular impression which the unknown had
caused her. Weighed down and abashed at his presence, she almost
regretted having made so candid a narrative to him of her unhappy life.
The Chourineur, on the contrary, was quite in high spirits; he had
devoured the whole harlequin without the least assistance; the wine and
brandy had made him very communicative; the fact of his having found his
master, as he called him, had been forgotten in the generous conduct of
Rodolph; and he also detected so decided a physical superiority, that
his humiliation had given way to a sentiment of admiration, mingled with
fear and respect. This absence of rancour, and the savage pride with
which he boasted of never having robbed, proved that the Chourineur was
not as yet thoroughly hardened. This had not escaped the sagacity of
Rodolph, and he awaited the man's recital with curiosity.

"Now, my boy," said he, "we are listening."

The Chourineur emptied his glass, and thus began:

"You, my poor girl, were at last taken to by the Chouette, whom the
devil confound! You never had a shelter until the moment when you were
imprisoned as a vagabond. I can never recollect having slept in what is
called a bed before I was nineteen years of age,--a happy age!--and then
I became a trooper."

"What, you have served, then, Chourineur?" said Rodolph.

"Three years; but you will hear all about it: the stones of the Louvre,
the lime-kilns of Clichy, and the quarries of Montrouge, these were the
hôtels of my youth. Then I had my house in Paris and in the country. Who
but I--"

"And what was your trade?"

"Faith, master, I have a foggy recollection of having strolled about in
my childhood with an old rag-picker, who almost thumped me to death; and
it must be true, for I have never since met one of these old Cupids,
with a wicker-work quiver, without a longing to pitch into him,--a proof
that one of them must have thumped me when I was a child. My first
employment was to help the knackers to cut the horses' throats at
Montfauçon. I was about ten or twelve. When I began to slash
(_chouriner_) these poor old beasts, it had quite an impression on me.
At the month's end I thought no more about it; on the contrary, I began
to like my trade. No one had his knife so sharpened and keen-edged as
mine; and that made me rejoice in using it. When I had cut the animals'
throats, they gave me for my trouble a piece of the thigh of some animal
that had died of disease; for those that they slaughter are sold to the
'cag-mag' shops near the School of Medicine, who convert it into beef,
mutton, veal, or game, according to the taste of purchasers. However,
when I got to my morsel of horse's flesh, I was as happy as a king! I
went with it into the lime-kiln like a wolf to his lair, and then, with
the leave of the lime-burners, I made a glorious fry on the ashes. When
the burners were not at work, I picked up some dry wood at Romainville,
set light to it, and broiled my steak under the walls of the bone-house.
The meat certainly was bloody, and almost raw, but that made a change."

"And your name? What did they call you?" asked Rodolph.

"I had hair much more flaxen than now, and the blood was always in my
eyes, and so they called me the 'Albino.' The Albinos are the white
rabbits amongst men; they have red eyes," added the Chourineur, in a
grave tone, and, as it were, with a physiological parenthesis.

"And your relations? your family?"

"My relations? Oh! they lodge at the same number as the Goualeuse's.
Place of my birth? Why, the first corner of no-matter-what street,
either on the right or left-hand side of the way, and either going up or
coming down the kennel."

"Then you have cursed your father and mother for having abandoned you?"

"Why, that would not have set my leg if I had broken it! No matter;
though it's true they played me a scurvy trick in bringing me into the
world. But I should not have complained if they had made me as beggars
ought to be made; that is to say, without the sense of cold, hunger, or
thirst. Beggars who don't like thieving would find it greatly to their
advantage."

"You were cold, thirsty, hungry, Chourineur, and yet you did not steal?"

"No; and yet I was horribly wretched. It's a fact, that I have often
gone with an empty bread-basket (fasted) for two days at a time: that
was more than my share; but I never stole."

"For fear of a gaol?"

"Pooh!" said the Chourineur, shrugging his shoulders, and laughing
loudly, "I should then not have stolen bread, for fear of getting my
allowance, eh? An honest man, I was famishing; a thief, I should have
been supported in prison, and right well, too! But I did not steal,
because--because--why, because the idea of stealing never came across
me; so that's all about it!"

This reply, noble as it was in itself, but of the rectitude of which the
Chourineur himself had no idea, perfectly astonished Rodolph. He felt
that the poor fellow who had remained honest in the midst of the most
cruel privations was to be respected twofold, since the punishment of
the crime became a certain resource for him. Rodolph held out his hand
to this ill-used savage of civilisation, whom misery had been unable
wholly to corrupt. The Chourineur looked at his host in
astonishment,--almost with respect; he hardly dared to touch the hand
tendered to him. He felt impressed with some vague idea that there was a
wide abyss between Rodolph and himself.

"'Tis well," said Rodolph to him, "you have heart and honour."

"Heart? honour? what, I? Come, now, don't chaff me," he replied, with
surprise.

"To suffer misery and hunger rather than steal, is to have heart and
honour," said Rodolph, gravely.

"Well, it may be," said the Chourineur, as if thinking, "it may be so."

"Does it astonish you?"

"It really does; for people don't usually say such things to me; they
generally treat me as they would a mangy dog. It's odd, though, the
effect what you say has on me. Heart! honour!" he repeated, with an air
which was actually pensive.

"Well, what ails you?"

"I' faith, I don't know," replied the Chourineur, in a tone of emotion;
"but these words, do you see, they quite make my heart beat; and I feel
more flattered than if any one told me I was a 'better man' than either
the Skeleton or the Schoolmaster. I never felt anything like it before.
Be sure, though, that these words, and the blows of the fist at the end
of my tussle,--you did lay 'em on like a good 'un,--not alluding to what
you pay for the supper, and the words you have said--in a word," he
exclaimed, bluntly, as if he could not find language to express his
thoughts, "make sure that in life or death you may depend on the
Chourineur."

Rodolph, unwilling to betray his emotion, replied in a tone as calm as
he could assume, "How long did you go on as an amateur knacker?"

"Why, at first, I was quite sick of cutting up old worn-out horses, who
could not even kick; but when I was about sixteen, and my voice began to
get rough, it became a passion--a taste--a relish--a rage--with me to
cut and slash. I did not care for anything but that; not even eating and
drinking. You should have seen me in the middle of my work! Except an
old pair of woollen trousers, I was quite naked. When, with my large and
well-whetted knife in my hand, I had about me fifteen or twenty horses
waiting their turn, by Jupiter! when I began to slaughter them, I don't
know what possessed me,--I was like a fury. My ears had singing in them,
and I saw everything _red_,--all was red; and I slashed, and slashed,
and slashed, until my knife fell from my hands! Thunder! what happiness!
Had I had millions, I could have paid them to have enjoyed my trade!"

"It is that which has given you the habit of stabbing," said Rodolph.

"Very likely; but when I was turned of sixteen, the passion became so
strong that when I once began slashing, I became mad; I spoiled my work;
yes, I spoiled the skins, because I slashed and cut them across and
across; for I was so furious that I could not see clearly. At last they
turned me out of the yard. I wanted employment with the butchers, for I
have always liked that sort of business. Well, they quite looked down
upon me; they despised me as a shoemaker does a cobbler. Then I had to
seek my bread elsewhere, and I didn't find it very readily; and this was
the time when my bread-basket was so often empty. At length I got
employment in the quarries at Montrouge; but, at the end of two years, I
was tired of going always around like a squirrel in his cage, and
drawing stone for twenty sous a day. I was tall and strong, and so I
enlisted in a regiment. They asked my name, my age, and my papers. My
name?--the Albino. My age?--look at my beard. My papers?--here's the
certificate of the master quarryman. As I was just the fellow for a
grenadier, they took me."

"With your strength, courage, and taste for chopping and slashing, you
ought, in war-time, to have been made an officer."

"Thunder and lightning! what do you say? What! to cut up English or
Prussians! Why, that would have been better than to cut up old horses;
but, worse luck, there was no war, but a great deal of discipline. An
apprentice tries to hit his master a thump; well, if he be the weaker,
why, he gets the worst of it; if he be the stronger, he has the best of
it; he is turned out-of-doors, perhaps put into the cage,--and that is
all. In the army it is quite a different thing. One day our sergeant had
bullied me a good deal, to make me more attentive,--he was right, for I
was very slow; I did not like a poke he gave me, and I kicked at him; he
pushed me again, I returned his poke; he collared me, and I gave him a
punch of the head. They fell on me, and then my blood was up in my eyes,
and I was enraged in a moment. I had my knife in my hand--I belonged to
the cookery--and I 'went it my hardest.' I cut, slashed,--slashed,
chopped, as if I was in the slaughter-house. I made 'cold meat' of the
sergeant, wounded two soldiers,--it was a real shambles; I gave the
three eleven wounds,--yes, eleven. Blood flowed, flowed everywhere,
blood, as though we were in the bone-house,--I swam in it--"

The brigand lowered his head with a sombre, sullen air, and was silent.

"What are you thinking of, Chourineur?" asked Rodolph, with interest.

"Nothing," he replied, abruptly; and then, with an air of brutish
carelessness, he added, "At length they handcuffed me, and brought me
before the 'big wigs,' and I was cast for death."

"You escaped, however?"

"True; but I had fifteen years at the galleys instead of being
'scragged.' I forgot to tell you that whilst in the regiment I had saved
two of my comrades from drowning in the Marne, when we were quartered at
Milan. At another time,--you will laugh, and say I am amphibious either
in fire or water when saving men or women,--at another time, being in
garrison at Rouen, all the wooden houses in one quarter were on fire,
and burning like so many matches. I am the lad for a fire, and so I went
to the place in an instant. They told me that there was an old woman who
was bedridden, and could not escape from her room, which was already in
flames. I went towards it, and, by Jove! how it did burn; it reminded me
of the lime-kilns in my happy days. However, I saved the old woman,
although I had the very soles of my feet scorched. Thanks to my having
done these things, and the cunning of my advocate, my sentence was
changed, and, instead of being 'scragged,' I was only sent to the hulks
for fifteen years. When I found that my life would be spared, and I was
to go to the galleys, I would have jumped upon the babbling fool, and
twisted his neck, at the moment when he came to wish me joy, and to tell
me he had saved my life, and be hanged to him! only they prevented me."

"Were you sorry, then, to have your sentence commuted?"

"Yes; for those who sport with the knife, the headsman's steel is the
proper fate; for those who steal, the 'darbies' to their heels: each his
proper punishment. But to force you to live amongst galley-slaves, when
you have a right to be guillotined out of hand, is infamous; and,
besides, my life, when I first went to the Bagne, was rather queer; one
don't kill a man, and soon forget it, you must know."

"You feel some remorse, then, Chourineur?"

"Remorse? No; for I have served my time," said the savage; "but at
first, a night did not pass but I saw--like a nightmare--the sergeant
and soldiers whom I had slashed and slaughtered; that is, they were not
alone," added the brigand, in a voice of terror; "these were in tens,
and dozens, and hundreds, and thousands, each waiting his turn, in a
kind of slaughter-house, like the horses whose throats I used to cut at
Montfauçon, awaiting each his turn. Then, then, I saw _red_, and began
to cut and slash away on these men as I used formerly to do on the
horses. The more, however, I chopped down the soldiers, the faster the
ranks filled up with others; and as they died, they looked at one with
an air so gentle,--so gentle, that I cursed myself for killing 'em; but
I couldn't help it. That was not all. I never had a brother; and yet it
seemed as if every one of those whom I killed was my brother, and I
loved all of them. At last, when I could bear it no longer, I used to
wake covered all over with sweat, as cold as melting snow."

"That was a horrid dream, Chourineur!"

"It was; yes. That dream, do you see, was enough to drive one mad or
foolish; so, twice, I tried to kill myself, once by swallowing
verdigris, and another time by trying to choke myself with my chain;
but, confound it, I am as strong as a bull. The verdigris only made me
thirsty; and as for the twist of the chain round my neck, why, that
only gave me a natural cravat of a blue colour. Afterwards, the desire
of life came back to me, nay nightmare ceased to torment me, and I did
as others did."

"At the Bagne, you were in a good school for learning how to thieve?"

"Yes, but it was not to my taste. The other 'prigs' bullied me; but I
soon silenced them with a few thumps of my chain. It was in this way I
first knew the Schoolmaster; and I must pay him the compliment due to
his blows,--he paid me off as you did some little time ago."

"He is, then, a criminal who has served his time?"

"He was sentenced for life, but escaped."

"Escaped, and not denounced?"

"I'm not the man to denounce him. Besides, it would seem as if I were
afraid of him."

"But how is it that the police do not detect him? Have they not got his
description?"

"His description? Oh! yes, yes; but it is long since he has scraped out
from his phiz what nature had placed there; now, none but the 'baker who
puts the condemned in his oven' (the devil) could recognise him" (the
Schoolmaster).

"What has he done to himself?"

"He began by destroying his nose, which was an ell long; he ate it off
with vitriol."

"You jest."

"If he comes in this evening, you'll see. He had a nose like a parrot,
and now it is as flat as in a death's head; to say nothing of his lips,
which are as thick as your fist, and his face, which is as wrinkled as
the waistcoat of a rag-picker."

"And so he is not recognised?"

"It is six months since he escaped from Rochefort, and the 'traps' have
met him a hundred times without knowing him."

"Why was he at the Bagne?"

"For having been a forger, thief, and assassin. He is called the
Schoolmaster because he wrote a splendid hand, and has had a good
education."

"And is he much feared?"

"He will not be any longer, when you have given him such a licking as
you gave me. Oh, by Jove, I am anxious to see it!"

"What does he do for a living?"

"He is associated with an old woman as bad as himself, and as deep as
the 'old one;' but she is never seen, though he has told the ogress that
some day or other he would bring his 'mot' (woman) with him."

"And this women helps him in his robberies?"

"Yes, and in his murders too. They say he brags of having already, with
her assistance, 'done for' two or three persons; and, amongst others,
three weeks ago, a cattle-dealer on the road to Poissy, whom they also
robbed."

"He will be taken sooner or later."

"They must be very cunning, as well as powerful, to do that, for he
always has under his blouse a brace of loaded pistols and a dagger. He
says that Charlot (the executioner) waits for him, and he can only lose
his head once, and so he will kill all he can kill to try and escape.
Oh! he makes no mystery of it; and as he is twice as strong as you and
I, they will have a tough job who take him."

"What did you do, Chourineur, when you left the Bagne?"

"I offered myself to the master-lighterman of the Quai St. Paul, and I
get my livelihood there."

"But as you have never been a 'prig,' why do you live in the Cité?"

"Why, where else can I live? Who likes to be seen with a discharged
criminal? I should be tired of always being alone, for I like company,
and here I am with my equals. I have a bit of a row sometimes, and they
fear me like fire in the Cité; but the police have nothing to say to
me, except now and then for a 'shindy,' for which they give me, perhaps,
twenty-four hours at the watch-house, and there's an end of that."

"What do you earn a day?"

"Thirty-five sous for taking in the river foot-baths, up to the stomach
from twelve to fifteen hours a day, summer and winter; but let me be
just, and tell the truth; so if, through having my toes in the water, I
get the _grenouille_,[7] I am allowed to break my arms in breaking up
old vessels, and unloading timber on my back. I begin as a beast of
burden, and end like a fish's tail. When I lose my strength entirely, I
shall take a rake and a wicker basket, like the old rag-picker whom I
see in the recollections of my childhood."

  [7] A disease of the skin to which all who work in the water are
  liable.

"And yet you are not unhappy."

"There are worse than I am; and without my dreams of the sergeant and
soldiers with their throats cut,--for I have the dream still
sometimes,--I could quietly wait for the moment when I should drop down
dead at the corner of some dunghill, like that at which I was born; but
the dream--the dream--by heaven and earth! I don't like even to think of
that," said the Chourineur, and he emptied his pipe at the corner of the
table.

The Goualeuse had hardly listened to the Chourineur; she seemed wholly
absorbed in a deep and melancholy reverie. Rodolph himself was pensive.
A tragic incident occurred, which brought these three personages to a
recollection of the spot in which they were.




CHAPTER V.

THE ARREST.


The man who had gone out for a moment, after having requested the ogress
to look after his jug and plate, soon returned, accompanied by a tall,
brawny man, to whom he said, "It was a chance to meet in this way, old
fellow! Come in, and let us have a glass together."

The Chourineur said, in a low voice, to Rodolph and the Goualeuse,
pointing to the newcomer, "We shall have a row. He's a 'trap.' Look out
for squalls."

The two ruffians, one of whom, with the Greek skull-cap pulled over his
brows, had inquired several times for the Schoolmaster and the
Gros-Boiteux, exchanged rapid glances of the eye, and, rising suddenly
from the table, went towards the door; but the two police officers,
uttering a peculiar note, seized them. A fierce struggle ensued. The
door of the tavern opened, and all of the policemen dashed into the
room, whilst, outside, were seen the muskets of the _gens-d'armes_.
Taking advantage of the tumult, the charcoal-seller, of whom we have
spoken, advanced to the threshold of the _tapis-franc_, and, meeting the
eye of Rodolph, he put to his lips the forefinger of his right hand.
Rodolph, with a gesture as rapid as it was imperious, desired him to go,
and then turned his attention to the scene before him. The man with the
Greek skull-cap shrieked with rage, and, half extended on a table,
struggled so desperately, that three men could scarcely hold him. His
companion, enfeebled, dejected, with livid aspect and pale lips, his
lower jaw fallen, and shaking convulsively, made no resistance, but
held out his hands to be enclasped by the handcuffs. The ogress, seated
at her bar, and used to such scenes, remained motionless, with her hands
in the pockets of her apron.

"What have these fellows done, my dear M. Narcisse Borel?" inquired she
of one of the policemen whom she knew.

"Killed an old woman yesterday in the Rue St. Christophe, and robbed her
chamber. Before she died, the poor old thing said that she had bitten
one of her murderers in the hand. We had our eyes on these two
scoundrels; and my comrade, having come to make sure of his men, why, we
have made free to take them."

"How lucky they paid me beforehand for their pint!" said the ogress.
"Won't you take a dram o' nothin' 'short,' M. Narcisse? Just a 'go' of
'Ratifi' of the Column.'"

"Thanks, Mother Ponisse, but I must make sure of my game; one fellow
shows fight still."

The assassin in the Greek cap was furious with rage, and when they tried
to get him into a hackney-coach which was waiting in the street, he
resisted so stoutly that they were obliged to carry him. His accomplice,
seized with a nervous tremor, could hardly support himself, and his blue
lips trembled as though he were speaking. They threw him, helpless and
unresisting, into the vehicle. Before he left the _tapis-franc_, the
head officer looked attentively at the other guests assembled, and said
to the Chourineur, in a tone almost kind:

"What, you here, you bad lot? Why, it is a long time since we heard
anything of you. What, no more rows? Are you growing steady?"

"Steady as a stone figure. Why, you know that now I never break a head,
even if I am begged to do so!"

"Oh, I don't think that would cost you much trouble, strong as you
are."

"Yet here is my master," said the Chourineur, laying his hand on
Rodolph's shoulder.

"Stay, I do not know him," said the _agent de police_, looking
steadfastly at Rodolph.

"And I do not think we shall form an acquaintance now," replied he.

"I hope not, for your sake, my fine fellow," said the agent; then,
turning to the ogress, "Good night, Mother Ponisse; your _tapis-franc_
is a regular mouse-trap; this is the third assassin I have taken here."

"I hope it won't be the last, M. Narcisse; it is quite at your service,"
said the ogress, making a very insinuating nod with her head.

After the departure of the police, the young vagabond with the haggard
visage, who was smoking and drinking brandy, refilled his pipe, and said
in a hoarse voice to the Chourineur:

"Didn't you 'twig' the 'cove' in the Greek cap? He's Boulotte's man.
When I saw the traps walk in, I says to myself, says I, there's
something up; and then, too, I saw him keep his hand always under the
table."

"It's lucky for the Schoolmaster and Gros-Boiteux that they were not
here," said the ogress; "Greek cap asked twice for him, and said they
had business together; but I never turn 'nose' (informer) on any
customer. If they take them, very well,--every one to his trade; but I
never sell my friends. Oh, talk of the old gentleman, and you see his
horns," added the hag, as at the moment a man and woman entered the
cabaret; "here they are,--the Schoolmaster and his companion. Well, he
was right not to show her, for I never see such an ugly creetur in my
born days. She ought to be very much obliged to him for having taken up
with such a face."

At the name of the Schoolmaster, a sort of shudder seemed to circulate
amongst the guests of the _tapis-franc_. Rodolph, himself, in spite of
his natural intrepidity, could not wholly subdue a slight emotion at the
sight of this redoubtable ruffian, whom he contemplated for some
seconds with a mixed feeling of curiosity and horror. The Chourineur had
spoken truth when he said that the Schoolmaster was frightfully
mutilated. Nothing can be imagined more horrible than the countenance of
this man. His face was furrowed in all directions with deep, livid
cicatrices; the corrosive action of the vitriol had puffed out his lips;
the cartilages of his nose were divided, and two misshapen holes
supplied the loss of nostrils. His gray eyes were bright, small,
circular, and sparkled savagely; his forehead, as flat as a tiger's, was
half hidden beneath a fur cap, with long yellow hair, looking like the
crest of a monster.

The Schoolmaster was not more than five feet four or five; his head,
which was disproportionately large, was buried between two shoulders,
broad, powerful, and fleshy, displaying themselves even under the loose
folds of his coarse cotton blouse; he had long, muscular arms, hands
short, thick, and hairy to the very fingers' end, with legs somewhat
bowed, whose enormous calves betokened his vast strength. This man
presented, in fact, the exaggeration of what there is of short,
thickset, and condensed, in the type of the Hercules Farnese. As to the
expression of ferocity which suffused this hideous mask, and the
restless, wild, and glaring look, more like a wild beast than a human
being, it is impossible to describe them.

The woman who accompanied the Schoolmaster was old, and rather neatly
dressed in a brown gown, with a plaid shawl, of red and black check, and
a white bonnet. Rodolph saw her profile, and her green eye, hooked nose,
skinny lips, peaked chin, and countenance at once wicked and cunning,
reminded him involuntarily of La Chouette, that horrible old wretch who
had made poor Fleur-de-Marie her victim. He was just on the point of
saying this to the girl, when he saw her suddenly turn pale with fright,
whilst looking at the hideous companion of the Schoolmaster, and
seizing the arm of Rodolph with a trembling hand, the Goualeuse said, in
a low voice:

"Oh, the Chouette! the Chouette!--the one-eyed woman!"

At this moment the Schoolmaster, after having exchanged a few words in
an undertone with Barbillon, came slowly towards the table where
Rodolph, the Goualeuse, and the Chourineur were sitting, and addressing
himself to Fleur-de-Marie, in a hoarse voice, said:

"Ah, my pretty, fair miss, you must quit these two 'muffs,' and come
with me."

The Goualeuse made no reply, but clung to Rodolph, her teeth chattering
with fright.

"And I shall not be jealous of my man, my little _fourline_" (a pet word
for assassin), added the Chouette, laughing loudly. She had not yet
recognised in Goualeuse "Pegriotte," her old victim.

"Well, my little white face, dost hear me?" said the monster, advancing.
"If thou dost not come, I'll poke your eye out, and make you a match for
the Chouette. And thou with the moustache," he said to Rodolph, "if thou
dost not stand from between me and the wench, I'll crack thy crown."

"Defend me! oh, defend me!" cried Fleur-de-Marie to Rodolph, clasping
her hands. Then, reflecting that she was about to expose him to great
danger, she added, in a low voice, "No, no, do not move, Mister Rodolph;
if he comes nearer, I will cry out for help, and for fear of the
disturbance, which may call in the police, the ogress will take my
part."

"Don't be alarmed, my child," said Rodolph, looking calmly at the
Schoolmaster; "you are beside me,--don't stir; and as this ill-looking
scoundrel makes you as well as myself feel uncomfortable, I will kick
him out."

"Thou?" said the Schoolmaster.

"I!" said Rodolph. And, in spite of the efforts of the Goualeuse, he
rose from the table. Despite his hardihood, the Schoolmaster retreated a
step, so threatening were the looks, so commanding the deportment, of
Rodolph. There are peculiar glances of the eye which are irresistible,
and certain celebrated duellists are said to owe their bloody triumphs
to this fascinating glance, which unmans, paralyses, and destroys their
adversaries. The Schoolmaster trembled, retreated a step, and, for once,
distrustful of his giant strength, felt under his blouse for his long
cut-and-thrust knife. A murder would have stained the _tapis-franc_, no
doubt, if the Chouette, taking the Schoolmaster by the arm, had not
screamed out:

"A minute, a minute, _fourline_,--let me say a word! You shall walk into
these two 'muffs' all the same, presently."

The Schoolmaster looked at her with astonishment. For some minutes she
had been looking at Fleur-de-Marie with fixed and increasing attention,
as if trying to refresh her memory. At length no doubt remained, and she
recognised the Goualeuse.

"Is it possible?" she cried, clasping her hands in astonishment. "It is
Pegriotte, who stole my barley-sugar. But where do you come from? Is it
the devil who sends you back?" and she shook her clenched hand at the
young girl. "You won't come into my clutch again, eh? But be easy; if I
do not pull out your teeth, I will have out of your eyes every tear in
your body. Come, no airs and graces. You don't know what I mean. Why, I
have found out the people who had the care of you before you were handed
over to me. The Schoolmaster saw at the _Pré_ (the galleys) the man who
brought you to my 'crib' when you were a brat, and he has proofs that
the people who had you first were 'gentry coves'" (rich people).

"My parents! Do you know them?" cried Fleur-de-Marie.

"Never mind whether I know them or not, you shall know nothing about it.
The secret is mine and my _fourline's_, and I will tear out his tongue
rather than he shall blab it. What! it makes you snivel, does it,
Pegriotte?"

"Oh, no," said Goualeuse, with a bitterness of accent; "_now_ I do not
care ever to know my parents."

Whilst La Chouette was speaking, the Schoolmaster had resumed his
assurance, for, looking at Rodolph, he could not believe that a young
man of slight and graceful make could for a moment cope with him, and,
confident in his brutal force, he approached the defender of Goualeuse,
and said to the Chouette, in an imperious voice:

"Hold your jaw! I'll tackle with this swell, and then the fair lady may
think me more to her fancy than he is."

With one bound Rodolph leaped on the table.

"Take care of my plates!" shouted the ogress.

The Schoolmaster stood on his guard, his two hands in front, his chest
advanced, firmly planted on his legs, and arched, as it were, on his
brawny legs, which were like balusters of stone. At the moment when
Rodolph was springing at him, the door of the _tapis-franc_ opened with
violence, and the charcoal-man, of whom we have before spoken, and who
was upwards of six feet high, dashed into the apartment, pushed the
Schoolmaster on one side rudely, and coming up to Rodolph, said, in
German, in his ear:

"Monseigneur, the countess and her brother--they are at the end of the
street."

At these words Rodolph made an impatient and angry gesture, threw a
louis d'or on the bar of the ogress, and made for the door in haste. The
Schoolmaster attempted to arrest Rodolph's progress, but he, turning to
him, gave him two or three rapid blows with his fists over the nose and
eyes, and with such potent effect, that the beast staggered with very
giddiness, and fell heavily against a table, which alone prevented his
prostration on the floor.

"_Vive la Charte!_ those are _my_ blows,--I know them," cried the
Chourineur; "two or three more lessons like that, and I shall know all
about it."

Restored to himself after a few moments, the Schoolmaster darted off in
pursuit of Rodolph, but he had disappeared with the charcoal-man in the
dark labyrinth of the streets of the Cité, and the brigand found it
useless to follow.

At the moment when the Schoolmaster had returned, foaming with rage, two
persons, approaching from the opposite side to that by which Rodolph had
disappeared, entered into the _tapis-franc_, hastily, and out of breath,
as if they had been running far and fast. Their first impulse was to
look around the room.

"How unfortunate!" said one of them; "he has gone,--another opportunity
lost."

The two newcomers spoke in English. The Goualeuse, horror-struck at
meeting with the Chouette, and dreading the threats of the Schoolmaster,
took advantage of the tumult and confusion caused by the arrival of the
two fresh guests in the _tapis-franc_, and, quietly gliding out by the
half-opened door, left the cabaret.




CHAPTER VI.

THOMAS SEYTON AND THE COUNTESS SARAH.


The two persons who had just entered the _tapis-franc_ were quite of
another class from those who ordinarily frequented it. One, tall and
erect, had hair almost white, black eyebrows and whiskers, a long and
tanned face, with a stiff, formal air. His long frock coat was buttoned
up to the throat, _à la militaire_. We shall call this individual Thomas
Seyton. His companion was young, pale, and handsome, and appeared about
thirty-one or two years of age. His hair, eyebrows, and eyes were of a
deep black, which showed off the more fully the pure whiteness of his
face. By his step, the smallness of his stature, and the delicacy of his
features, it was easy to detect a woman in male habiliments. This female
was the Countess Sarah Macgregor. We will hereafter inform our readers
of the motives and events which had brought the countess and her brother
into this cabaret of the Cité.

"Call for something to drink, Thomas, and ask the people here about
_him_; perhaps they may give us some information," said Sarah, still
speaking English.

The man with white hair and black eyebrows sat down at a table, whilst
Sarah was wiping her forehead, and said to the ogress, in excellent
French, "Madame, let us have something to drink, if you please."

The entrance of these two persons into the _tapis-franc_ had excited
universal attention. Their dress, their manners, all announced that they
never frequented low drinking-shops, whilst, by their restless looks
and disturbed countenances, it might be judged that some very powerful
motives had led them hither. The Chourineur, the Schoolmaster, and the
Chouette viewed them with increasing curiosity.

Startled by the appearance of such strange customers, the ogress shared
in the general surprise. Thomas Seyton, a second time, and with an
impatient tone, said, "We have called for something to drink, ma'am;
pray let us have it."

Mother Ponisse, flattered by their courtesy of manner, left her bar,
and, coming towards her new guests, leaned her arms on their table, and
said, "Will you have a pint of wine in measure or a bottle?"

"A bottle of wine, glasses, and some water."

The ogress brought the supplies demanded, and Thomas Seyton threw her a
five-franc piece, and refused the change which she offered to him.

"Keep it, my good woman, for yourself, and perhaps you will take a glass
with us."

"You're uncommon purlite, sir," looking at the countess's brother with
as much surprise as gratitude.

"But tell me, now," said he; "we had appointed to meet a friend in a
cabaret in this street, and have, perhaps, mistaken the house in coming
here."

"This is the 'White Rabbit,' at your service, sir."

"That's right enough, then," said Thomas, making a sign to Sarah; "yes,
it was at the 'White Rabbit' that he was to give us the meeting."

"There are not two 'White Rabbits' in this street," said the ogress,
with a toss of her head. "But what sort of a person was your friend?"

"Tall, slim, and with hair and moustaches of light chestnut," said
Seyton.

"Exactly, exactly; that's the man who has just gone out. A charcoal-man,
very tall and stout, came in and said a few words to him, and they left
together."

"The very man we want to meet," said Tom.

"Were they alone here?" inquired Sarah.

"Why, the charcoal-man only came in for one moment; but your comrade
supped here with the Chourineur and Goualeuse;" and with a nod of her
head, the ogress pointed out the individual of the party who was left
still in the cabaret.

Thomas and Sarah turned towards the Chourineur. After contemplating him
for a few minutes, Sarah said, in English, to her companion, "Do you
know this man?"

"No; Karl lost all trace of Rodolph at the entrance of these obscure
streets. Seeing Murphy disguised as a charcoal-seller, keeping watch
about this cabaret, and constantly peeping through the windows, he was
afraid that something wrong was going on, and so came to warn us.
Murphy, no doubt, recognised him."

During this conversation, held in a very low tone, and in a foreign
tongue, the Schoolmaster said to the Chouette, looking at Tom and Sarah,
"The swell has shelled out a 'bull' to the ogress. It is just twelve,
rains and blows like the devil. When they leave the 'crib,' we will be
on their 'lay,' and draw the 'flat' of his 'blunt.' As his 'mot' is with
him, he'll hold his jaw."

If Tom and Sarah had heard this foul language, they would not have
understood it, and would not have detected the plot against them.

"Be quiet, _fourline_," answered the Chouette; "if the 'cull' sings out
for the 'traps,' I have my vitriol in my pocket, and will break the
phial in his 'patter-box.' Nothing like a drink to keep children from
crying," she added. "Tell me, darling, sha'n't we lay hands on Pegriotte
the first time we meet with her? And only let me once get her to our
place, and I'll rub her chops with my vitriol, and then my lady will no
longer be proud of her fine skin."

"Well said, Chouette; I shall make you my wife some day or other," said
the Schoolmaster; "you have no equal for skill and courage. On that
night with the cattle-dealer, I had an opportunity of judging of you;
and I said, 'Here's the wife for me; she works better than a man.'"

"And you said right, _fourline_; if the Skeleton had had a woman like me
at his elbow, he would not have been nabbed with his gully in the dead
man's weasand."

"He's done up, and now he will not leave the 'stone jug,' except to kiss
the headsman's daughter, and be a head shorter."

"What strange language these people talk!" said Sarah, who had
involuntarily heard the last few words of the conversation between the
Schoolmaster and the Chouette. Then she added, pointing to the
Chourineur, "If we ask this man some questions about Rodolph, perhaps he
may be able to answer them."

"We can but try," replied Thomas, who said to the Chourineur, "Comrade,
we expected to find in this cabaret a friend of ours; he supped with
you, I find. Perhaps, as you know him, you will tell us which way he has
gone?"

"I know him because he gave me a precious good hiding two hours ago, to
prevent me from beating Goualeuse."

"And have you never seen him before?"

"Never; we met by chance in the alley which leads to Bras Rouge's
house."

"Hostess, another bottle of the best," said Thomas Seyton.

Sarah and he had hardly moistened their lips, and their glasses were
still full; but Mother Ponisse, doubtless anxious to pay proper respect
to her own cellar, had frequently filled and emptied hers.

"And put it on the table where that gentleman sits, if he will permit,"
added Thomas, who, with Sarah, seated themselves beside the Chourineur,
who was as much astonished as flattered by such politeness.

The Schoolmaster and the Chouette were talking over their own dark plans
in low tones and "flash" language. The bottle being brought, and Sarah
and her brother seated with the Chourineur and the ogress, who had
considered a second invitation as superfluous, the conversation was
resumed.

"You told us, my good fellow, that you met our comrade Rodolph in the
house where Bras Rouge lives?" inquired Thomas Seyton, as he hob and
nobbed with the Chourineur.

"Yes, my good fellow," replied he, as he emptied his glass at a gulp.

"What a singular name is Bras Rouge! What is this Bras Rouge?"

"_Il pastique la maltouze_" (smuggles), said the Chourineur, in a
careless tone, and then added, "This is jolly good wine, Mother
Ponisse!"

"If you think so, do not spare it, my fine fellow," said Seyton, and he
filled the Chourineur's glass as he spoke.

"Your health, mate," said he, "and the health of your little friend,
who--but mum. 'If my aunt was a man, she'd be my uncle,' as the proverb
says. Ah! you sly rogue, I'm up to you!"

Sarah coloured slightly as her brother continued, "I did not quite
understand what you meant about Bras Rouge. Rodolph came from his house,
no doubt?"

"I told you that Bras Rouge _pastique la maltouze_."

Thomas regarded the Chourineur with an air of surprise.

"What do you mean by _pastique la mal_--What do you call it?"

"_Pastiquer la maltouze._ He smuggles, I suppose you would call it; but
it seems you can't 'patter flash?'"

"My fine fellow, I don't understand one word you say."

"I see you can't talk slang like M. Rodolph."

"Slang?" said Thomas Seyton, looking at Sarah with an astonished air.

"Ah! you are yokels; but comrade Rodolph is an out-and-out pal, he is.
Though only a fan-painter, yet he is as 'downy' in 'flash' as I am
myself. Well, since you can't speak this very fine language, I tell you,
in plain French, that Bras Rouge is a smuggler, and, besides that, has a
small tavern in the Champs Elysées. I say, without breaking faith, that
he is a smuggler, for he makes no secret of it, but owns it under the
very nose of the custom-house officers. Find him out, though, if you
can; Bras Rouge is a deep one."

"What could Rodolph want at the house of this man?" asked Sarah.

"Really, sir, or madam, which you please, I know nothing about anything,
as true as I drink this glass of wine. I was chaffing to-night with the
Goualeuse, who thought I was going to beat her, and she ran up Bras
Rouge's alley, and I after her; it was as dark as the devil. Instead of
hitting Goualeuse, however, I stumbled on Master Rodolph, who soon gave
me better than I sent. Such thumps! and especially those infernal
thwacks with his fist at last. My eyes! how hot and heavy they did fall!
But he's promised to teach me, and to--"

"And Bras Rouge, what sort of a person is he?" asked Tom. "What goods
does he sell?"

"Bras Rouge? Oh, by the Holy! he sells everything he is forbidden to
sell, and does everything which it is forbidden to do. That's his line,
ain't it, Mother Ponisse?"

"Oh! he's a boy with more than one string to his bow," answered the
ogress. "He is, besides, principal occupier of a certain house in the
Rue du Temple,--a rum sort of a house, to be sure; but mum," added she,
fearing to have revealed too much.

"And what is the address of Bras Rouge in that street?" asked Seyton of
the Chourineur.

"No. 13, sir."

"Perhaps we may learn something there," said Seyton, in a low voice, to
his sister. "I will send Karl thither to-morrow."

"As you know M. Rodolph," said the Chourineur, "you may boast the
acquaintance of a stout friend and a good fellow. If it had not been for
the charcoal-man, he would have 'doubled up' the Schoolmaster, who is
there in the corner with the Chouette. By the Lord! I can hardly contain
myself, when I see that old hag, and know how she behaved to the
Goualeuse,--but patience, 'a blow delayed is not a blow lost,' as the
saying is."

The Hotel de Ville clock struck midnight; the lamp of the tavern only
shed a dim and flickering light. Except the Chourineur and his two
companions, the Schoolmaster, and the Screech-owl, all the guests of the
_tapis-franc_ had retired one after the other.

The Schoolmaster said, in an undertone, to the Chouette, "If we go and
hide in the alley opposite, we shall see the swells come out, and know
which road they take. If they turn to the left, we can double upon them
at the turning of the Rue Saint Eloi; if to the right, we will wait for
them by the ruins close to the tripe-market. There's a large hole close
by, and I have a capital idea."

The Schoolmaster and the Chouette then went towards the door.

"You won't, then, take a 'drain' of nothin' to-night?" said the ogress.

"No, Mother Ponisse, we only came in to take shelter from the rain,"
said the Schoolmaster, as he and the Chouette went out.




CHAPTER VII.

"YOUR MONEY OR YOUR LIFE."


The noise which was made by the shutting of the door aroused Tom and
Sarah from their reverie, and they rose, and, having thanked the
Chourineur for the information he had given them, the fellow went out,
the wind blowing very strongly, and the rain falling in torrents. The
Schoolmaster and the Chouette, hidden in an alley opposite the
_tapis-franc_, saw the Chourineur go down the street, in the direction
of the street in which the house in ruins was situated. His steps, which
were somewhat irregular, in consequence of the frequent libations of the
evening, were soon unheard amidst the whistling of the storm and the
sheets of rain which dashed against the walls. Sarah and Tom left the
tavern in spite of the tempest, and took a contrary direction to the
Chourineur.

"They're done for," said the Schoolmaster, in a low key, to the
Chouette; "out with your vitriol, and mind your eye."

"Let us take off our shoes, and then they won't hear us as we follow,"
suggested the Chouette.

"You are right,--always right; let us tread like cats, my old darling."

The two monsters took off their shoes, and moved stealthily along,
keeping in the shadows of the houses. By means of this stratagem they
followed so closely, that, although within a few steps of Sarah and Tom,
they did not hear them.

"Fortunately our hackney-coach is at the end of the street; the rain
falls in torrents. Are you not cold, Sarah?"

"Perhaps we shall glean something from this smuggler,--this Bras Rouge,"
said Sarah, in a thoughtful tone, and not replying to her brother's
inquiry.

He suddenly stopped, and said, "I have taken a wrong turning; I ought to
have gone to the right when I left the tavern; we must pass by a house
in ruins to reach the _fiacre_. We must turn back."

The Schoolmaster and the Chouette, who followed on the heels of their
intended victims, retreated into the dark porch of a house close at
hand, so that they might not be perceived by Tom and Sarah, who, in
passing, almost touched them with their elbows.

"I am glad they have gone that way," said the Schoolmaster, "for if the
'cove' resists, I have my own idea."

Sarah and her brother, having again passed by the _tapis-franc_, arrived
close to the dilapidated house, which was partly in ruins, and its
opened cellars formed a kind of gulf, along which the street ran in that
direction. In an instant, the Schoolmaster, with a leap resembling in
strength and agility the spring of a tiger, seized Seyton with one hand
by the throat, and exclaimed, "Your money, or I will fling you into this
hole!"

Then the brigand, pushing Seyton backwards, shoved him off his balance,
and with one hand held him suspended over the mouth of the deep
excavation; whilst, with his other hand, he grasped the arm of Sarah, as
if in a vice. Before Tom could make the slightest struggle, the Chouette
had emptied his pockets with singular dexterity. Sarah did not utter a
cry, nor try to resist; she only said, in a calm tone, "Give up your
purse, brother;" and then accosting the robber, "We will make no noise;
do not do us any injury."

The Chouette, having carefully searched the pockets of the two victims
of this ambush, said to Sarah, "Let's see your hands, if you've got any
rings. No," said the old brute, grumblingly, "no, not one ring. What a
shame!"

Tom Seyton did not lose his presence of mind during this scene, rapidly
and unexpectedly as it had occurred.

"Will you strike a bargain? My pocketbook contains papers quite useless
to you; return it to me, and to-morrow I will give you twenty-five louis
d'ors," said Tom to the Schoolmaster, whose hand relaxed something of
its fierce gripe.

"Oh! ah! to lay a trap to catch us," replied the thief. "Be off, without
looking behind you, and be thankful that you have escaped so well."

"One moment," said the Chouette; "if he behaves well, he shall have his
pocketbook. There is a way." Then, addressing Thomas Seyton, "You know
the plain of St. Denis?"

"I do."

"Do you know where St. Ouen is?"

"Yes."

"Opposite St. Ouen, at the end of the road of La Revolte, the plain is
wide and open. Across the fields, one may see a long way. Come there
to-morrow, quite alone, with your money in your hand; you will find me
and the pocketbook ready. Hand me the cash, and I will hand you the
pocketbook."

"But he'll trap you, Chouette."

"Oh, no, he won't; I'm up to him or any of his dodges. We can see a long
way off. I have only one eye, but that is a piercer; and if the 'cove'
comes with a companion, he won't find anybody; I shall have 'mizzled.'"

A sudden idea seemed to strike Sarah, and she said to the brigand, "Will
you like to gain some money?"

"Yes."

"Did you see, in the cabaret we have just left--for I know you
again--the man whom the charcoal-man came to seek?"

"A dandy with moustaches? Yes, I would have stuck it into the fellow,
but he did not give me time. He stunned me with two blows of his fists,
and upset me on the table,--for the first time that any man ever did so.
Curses on him! but I will be revenged."

"He is the man I mean," said Sarah.

"He?" cried the Schoolmaster, "a thousand francs, and I'll kill him."

"Wretch! I do not seek his life," replied Sarah to the Schoolmaster.

"What, then, would you have?"

"Come to-morrow to the plain of St. Denis; you will there find my
companion," she replied; "you will see that he is alone, and he will
tell you what to do. I will not give you one thousand, but two thousand,
francs, if you succeed."

"_Fourline_," said the Chouette, in a low tone, to the Schoolmaster,
"there's 'blunt' to be had; these are a 'swell' lot, who want to be
revenged on an enemy, and that enemy is the beggar that you wished to
'floor.' Let's go and meet him. I would go, if I were you. Fire and
smoke! Old boy, it will pay for looking after."

"Well, my wife shall be there," said the Schoolmaster; "you will tell
her what you want, and I shall see--"

"Be it so; to-morrow at one."

"At one o'clock."

"In the plain of St. Denis?"

"In the plain of St. Denis."

"Between St. Ouen and the road of La Revolte, at the end of the road?"

"Agreed."

"I will bring your pocketbook."

"And you shall have the five hundred francs I promised you, and we will
agree in the other matter, if you are reasonable."

"Now, you go to the right, and we to the left hand. Do not follow us, or
else--"

The Schoolmaster and the Chouette hurried off, whilst Tom and the
countess went in the other direction, towards Notre Dame.

A concealed witness had been present at this transaction; it was the
Chourineur, who had entered the cellars of the house to get shelter from
the rain. The proposal which Sarah made to the brigand respecting
Rodolph deeply interested the Chourineur, who, alarmed for the perils
which appeared about to beset his new friend, regretted that he could
not warn him of them. Perhaps his detestation of the Schoolmaster and
the Chouette might have something to do with this feeling.

The Chourineur resolved to inform Rodolph of the danger which threatened
him; but how? He had forgotten the address of the self-styled
fan-painter. Perhaps Rodolph would never again come to the
_tapis-franc_, and then how could he warn him? Whilst he was conning all
this over in his mind, the Chourineur had mechanically followed Tom and
Sarah, and saw them get into a coach which awaited them near Notre Dame.

The _fiacre_ started. The Chourineur got up behind, and at one o'clock
it stopped on the Boulevard de l'Observatoire, and Thomas and Sarah went
down a narrow entrance, which was close at hand. The night was pitch
dark, and the Chourineur, that he might know the next day the place
where he then was, drew from his pocket his clasp-knife, and cut a deep
notch in one of the trees at the corner of the entrance, and then
returned to his resting-place, which was at a considerable distance.

For the first time for a very long while, the Chourineur enjoyed in his
den a comfortable sleep, which was not once interrupted by the horrible
vision of the "Sergeant's slaughter-house," as, in his coarse language,
he styled it.




CHAPTER VIII.

THE WALK.


On the day after the evening on which the various events we have
described had passed, a bright autumnal sun shone from a pure sky; the
darkness of the night had wholly disappeared. Although always shaded by
the height of the houses, the disreputable neighbourhood into which the
reader has followed us seemed less horrible when viewed in the light of
open day.

Whether Rodolph no longer feared meeting with the two persons whom he
had evaded the over-night, or did not care whether he faced them or not,
about eleven o'clock in the morning he entered the Rue aux Fêves, and
directed his steps towards the tavern of the ogress.

Rodolph was still in a workman's dress; but there was a decided neatness
in his costume. His new blouse, open on his chest, showed a red woollen
shirt, closed by several silver buttons; whilst the collar of another
shirt, of white cotton, fell over a black silk cravat, loosely tied
around his neck. From under his sky blue velvet cap, with a bright
leather peak, several locks of chestnut hair were seen; and his boots,
cleaned very brightly, and replacing the heavy iron shoes of the
previous evening, showed off to advantage a well-formed foot, which
seemed all the smaller from appearing out of a loose pantaloon of olive
velveteen. The costume was well calculated to display the elegant shape
and carriage of Rodolph, which combined so much grace, suppleness, and
power. The ogress was airing herself at her door when Rodolph presented
himself.

"Your servant, young man; you have come, no doubt, for your change of
the twenty francs," she said, with some show of respect, not venturing
to forget that the conqueror of the Chourineur had handed her a louis
d'or the previous evening. "There is seventeen francs ten sous coming to
you; but that's not all. There was somebody here asking after you last
night,--a tall gent, well dressed, and with him a young woman in men's
clothes. They drank my best wine along with the Chourineur."

"Oh, with the Chourineur, did they? And what could they have to say to
him?"

"When I say they drank, I make a mistake; they only just sipped a drain
or so, and--"

"But what did they say to the Chourineur?"

"Oh, they talked of all manner of things,--of Bras Rouge, and the rain,
and fine weather."

"Do they know Bras Rouge?"

"Not by no means; the Chourineur told 'em all about him, and as how as
you--"

"Well, well, that is not what I want to know."

"You want your change."

"Yes, and I want to take Goualeuse to pass the day in the country."

"Oh, that's impossible!"

"Why?"

"Why? Because she may never come back again. Her things belong to me,
not including as she owes me a matter of ninety francs as a balance for
her board and lodging, for the six weeks as she has lodged with me; and
if I didn't know her to be as honest a gal as is, I should never let her
go out of sight."

"Goualeuse owes you ninety francs?"

"Ninety francs ten sous; but what's that to you, my lad? Are you a-going
to come 'my lord,' and pay it for her?"

"Yes," said Rodolph, throwing five louis on the ogress's bar, "and
what's your price for the clothes she wears?"

The old hag, amazed, looked at the louis one after the other, with an
air of much doubt and mistrust.

"What! do you think I have given you bad money? Send and get change for
one of them; but make haste about it. I say, again, how much for the
garments the poor girl is wearing?"

The ogress, divided between her desire to make a good harvest, her
surprise to see a workman with so much money, the fear of being cheated,
and the hopes of still greater gain, was silent for an instant, and then
replied, "Oh, them things is well worth a hundred francs."

"What! those rags? Come, now, you shall keep the change from yesterday,
and I'll give you another louis, and no more. If I give you all I have,
I shall cheat the poor, who ought to get some alms out of me."

"Well, then, my fine fellow, I'll keep my things, and Goualeuse sha'n't
go out. I have a right to sell my things for what I choose."

"May Lucifer one day fry you as you deserve! Here's your money; go and
look for Goualeuse."

The ogress pocketed the gold, thinking that the workman had committed a
robbery, or received a legacy, and then said, with a nasty leer, "Well,
indeed! Why not go up-stairs, and find Goualeuse yourself; she'll be
very glad to see you, for, on my life, she was much smitten with you
yesterday?"

"Do you go and fetch her, and tell her I will take her into the country;
that's all you need say; not a word about my having paid you her debt."

"Why not?"

"What's that to you?"

"Oh, nothing; it's no matter to me; I would rather that she still
believed herself in my clutch--"

"Will you hold your tongue, and do as I bid you?"

"Oh, what a cross creetur you are! I pity anybody who is under you.
Well, I'm going, I'm going;" and the ogress went up-stairs.

After a few minutes she came down again.

"Goualeuse would not believe me, and really turned quite crimson when
she knew you were here; and when I told her that I would give her leave
to pass the day in the country, I thought she would have gone
crazy,--for the first time in her life she was inclined to throw her
arms about my neck."

"That was her delight at leaving you."

Fleur-de-Marie entered at this moment, dressed as she was the
over-night, with her gown of brown stuff, her little orange shawl tied
behind her, and her handkerchief of red checks over her head, leaving
only two thick bands of light hair visible. She blushed when she saw
Rodolph, and looked down with a confused air.

"Would you like to pass the day in the country with me, my lass?" asked
Rodolph.

"Very much, indeed, M. Rodolph," said Goualeuse, "since madame gives me
leave."

"Yes, yes, you may go, my little duck, because you're such a good gal.
Come and kiss me afore you go."

And the old beldam offered her bloated lips to Fleur-de-Marie. The poor
girl, overcoming her disgust, bent her forehead to the ogress, but
Rodolph, giving a sudden push with his elbow, shoved the hag back on her
seat, took Fleur-de-Marie's arm, and left the _tapis-franc_, amidst the
loud maledictions of Mother Ponisse.

"Mind, M. Rodolph," said Goualeuse; "the ogress will, perhaps, throw
something at you,--she is very spiteful."

"Oh, don't heed her, my girl. But what's the matter with you? You seem
embarrassed, sad. Are you sorry for having come out with me?"

"Oh, dear, no; but--but--you give me your arm!"

"Well, and what of that?"

"You are a workman, and some one may tell your master that they met you
with me, and harm may come of it; masters do not like their workmen to
be unsteady." And Goualeuse gently removed her arm from that of Rodolph,
adding, "Go on by yourself; I will follow you to the barrier; when we
are once in the fields I can walk with you."

"Do not be uneasy," said Rodolph, touched by the poor girl's
consideration, and taking her arm again; "my master does not live in
this quarter, and we shall find a coach on the Quai aux Fleurs."

"As you please, M. Rodolph; I only said so that you might not get into
trouble."

"I am sure of that, and thank you very much. But tell me, is it all the
same to you what part of the country we go into?"

"Yes, quite so, M. Rodolph, so that it be the country. It is so fine and
it is so nice to breathe the open air! Do you know that I have not been
farther than the flower-market for these six weeks? And now, if the
ogress allows me to leave the Cité, she must have great confidence in
me."

"And when you came here, was it to buy flowers?"

"Oh, no, I had no money; I only came to look at them, and breathe their
beautiful smell. During the half-hour which the ogress allowed me to
pass on the quay on market-days, I was so happy that I forgot everything
else."

"And on returning to the ogress, and those filthy streets?"

"Oh, why, then I returned more sad than when I set out; but I wiped my
eyes, that I might not be beaten for crying. Yet, at the market, what
made me envious--oh, so envious!--was to see neat, clean little
workwomen, who were going away so gaily with a beautiful pot of flowers
in their hands."

"I am sure that if you had had but a few flowers in your own window,
they would have kept you company."

"What you say is quite true, M. Rodolph. Only imagine, one day, on her
birthday, the ogress, knowing my taste, gave me a little rose-tree. If
you only knew how happy it made me,--I was never tired of looking at
it,--my own rose-tree! I counted its leaves, its flowers; but the air of
the Cité is bad, and it began to wither in two days. Then--but you'll
laugh at me, M. Rodolph."

"No, no; go on."

"Well, then, I asked the ogress to let me go out, and take my rose-tree
for a walk, as I would have taken a child out. Well, then, I carried it
to the quay, thinking that to be with other flowers in the fresh and
balmy air would do it good. I bathed its poor fading leaves in the clear
waters of the fountain, and then to dry it I placed it for a full
quarter of an hour in the sun. Dear little rose-tree! it never saw the
sun in the Cité any more than I did, for in our street it never descends
lower than the roof. At last I went back again, and I assure you, M.
Rodolph, that, thanks to these walks, my rose-tree lived at least ten
days longer than it would have done, had I not taken such pains with
it."

"No doubt of it. But when it died, what a loss it must have been to
you!"

"I cried heartily, for it grieved me very, very much; and you see, M.
Rodolph,--for you know one loves flowers, although one hasn't any of
one's own,--you see, I felt grateful to it, that dear rose-tree, for
blooming so kindly for me, although I was so--"

Goualeuse bent her head, and blushed deeply.

"Unhappy child! With this feeling of your own position, you must
often--"

"Have desired to end it, you mean, sir?" said Goualeuse, interrupting
her companion. "Yes, yes, more than once. A month ago I looked over the
parapet at the Seine; but then, when I looked at the flowers, and the
sun, then I said, 'The river will be always there; I am but sixteen and
a half,--who knows?'"

"When you said 'who knows,' you had hope?"

"Yes."

"And what did you hope?"

"To find some charitable soul who would get me work, so that I might be
enabled to leave the ogress; and this hope comforted me. Then I said to
myself, I am very wretched, but I have never injured anybody, and if I
had any one to advise me I should not be as I am. This lightened my
sorrow a little, though it had greatly increased at the loss of my
rose-tree," added Goualeuse, with a sigh.

"Always so very sad."

"Yes; but look, here it is."

And Goualeuse took from her pocket a little bundle of wood trimmed very
carefully, and tied with a rose-coloured bow.

"What, have you kept it?"

"I have, indeed; it is all I possess in the world."

"What, have you nothing else?"

"Nothing."

"This coral necklace?"

"Belongs to the ogress."

"And you have not a piece of riband, a cap, or handkerchief?"

"No, nothing,--nothing but the dead branches of my poor rose-tree; and
that is why I love it so."

When Rodolph and Goualeuse had reached the Quai aux Fleurs, a coach was
waiting there, into which Rodolph handed Goualeuse. He got in himself,
saying to the driver:

"To St. Denis; I will tell you presently which road to take."

The coach went on. The sun was bright, and the sky cloudless, whilst the
air, fresh and crisp, circulated freely through the open windows.

"Here is a woman's cloak!" said Goualeuse, remarking that she had seated
herself on the garment without having at first noticed it.

"Yes, it is for you, my child; I brought it with me for fear you should
be cold."

Little accustomed to such attention, the poor girl looked at Rodolph
with surprise.

"_Mon Dieu!_ M. Rodolph, how kind you are; I am really ashamed--"

"Because I am kind?"

"No; but you do not speak as you did yesterday; you appear quite another
person."

"Tell me, then, Fleur-de-Marie, which do you like best,--the Rodolph of
yesterday, or the Rodolph of to-day?"

"I like you better now; yet yesterday I seemed to be more your equal."
Then, as if correcting herself, and fearing to have annoyed Rodolph, she
said to him, "When I say your equal, M. Rodolph, I do not mean that I
can ever be that."

"One thing in you astonishes me very much, Fleur-de-Marie."

"And what is that, M. Rodolph?"

"You appear to have forgotten that the Chouette said to you yesterday
that she knew the persons who had brought you up."

"Oh! I have not forgotten it; I thought of it all night, and I cried
bitterly; but I am sure it is not true; she invented this tale to make
me unhappy."

"Yet the Chouette may know more than you think. If it were so, should
you not be delighted to be restored to your parents?"

"Alas, sir! if my parents never loved me, what should I gain by
discovering them? They would only see me and--But if they _did_ ever
love me, what shame I should bring on them! Perhaps I should kill them!"

"If your parents ever loved you, Fleur-de-Marie, they will pity,
pardon, and still love you. If they have abandoned you, then, when they
see the frightful destiny to which they have brought you, _their_ shame
and remorse will avenge you."

"What is the good of vengeance?"

"You are right; let us talk no more on the subject."

At this moment the carriage reached St. Ouen, where the road divides to
St. Denis and the Revolte. In spite of the monotony of the landscape,
Fleur-de-Marie was so delighted at seeing the fields, as she called
them, that, forgetting the sad thoughts which the recollection of the
Chouette had awakened in her, her lovely countenance grew radiant with
delight. She leaned out of the window, clasping her hands, and crying:

"M. Rodolph, how happy I am! Grass! Fields! May I get out? It is so
fine! I should so like to run in the meadows."

"Let us run, then, my child. Coachman, stop."

"What! You, too? Will you run, M. Rodolph?"

"I'm having a holiday."

"Oh! What pleasure!"

And Rodolph and Goualeuse, taking each other's hand, ran as fast as they
could over a long piece of latter-grass, just mowed. It would be
impossible to describe the leaps and exclamations of joy, the intense
delight, of Fleur-de-Marie. Poor lamb! so long a prisoner, she inspired
the free air with indescribable pleasure. She ran, returned, stopped,
and then raced off again with renewed happiness. At the sight of the
daisies and buttercups Goualeuse could not restrain her transport,--she
did not leave one flower which she could gather. After having run about
in this way for some time, she became rather tired, for she had lost the
habit of exercise, and stopped to take breath, sitting down on the trunk
of a fallen tree which was lying at the edge of a deep ditch.

[Illustration: "_She Proffered to Rodolph the Bouquet_"
Etching by Mercier, after the drawing by Frank T. Merrill]

The clear and white complexion of Fleur-de-Marie, generally rather pale,
was now heightened by the brightest colour. Her large blue eyes sparkled
brightly, her vermilion lips, partly opened to recover her breath,
displayed two rows of liquid pearls; her bosom throbbed under her
worn-out little orange shawl, and she placed one of her hands upon her
heart, as if to restrain its quickened pulsation, whilst with the other
hand she proffered to Rodolph the bouquet of field flowers which she had
just gathered. Nothing could be more charming than the combination of
innocence and pure joy which beamed on her expressive countenance. When
Fleur-de-Marie could speak, she said to Rodolph, with an accent of
supreme happiness and of gratitude, almost amounting to piety:

"How good is the great God to give us so fine a day!"

A tear came into Rodolph's eye when he heard this poor, forsaken,
despised, lost creature utter a cry of happiness and deep gratitude to
the Creator, because she enjoyed a ray of sunshine and the sight of a
green field. He was roused from his reverie by an unexpected
occurrence.




CHAPTER IX.

THE SURPRISE.


We have said that Goualeuse was sitting on the trunk of a fallen tree,
at the edge of a deep ditch. Suddenly a man, springing up from the
bottom of this hollow, shook the rubbish from him under which he had
concealed himself, and burst into a loud fit of laughter. Goualeuse
turned around, screaming with alarm. It was the Chourineur.

"Don't be frightened, my girl," said the Chourineur, when he saw her
extreme fear, and that she had sought protection from her companion.
"Ah, Master Rodolph, here's a curious meeting, which I am sure neither
you nor I expected." Then he added, in a serious tone, "Listen, master.
People may say what they like, but there is something in the
air,--there, up there, above our heads, very wonderful; which seems to
say to a man, 'Go where I send you.' See how you two have been sent
here. It is devilish wonderful!"

"What are you doing there?" said Rodolph, greatly surprised.

"I was on the lookout in a matter of yours, master; but, thunder and
lightning! what a high joke that you should come at this particular
moment into this very neighbourhood of my country-house! There's
something in all this,--decidedly there is something."

"But again I ask you, what are you doing there?"

"All in good time, I'll tell you; only let me first look about me for a
moment."

The Chourineur then ran towards the coach, which was some distance off,
looked this way and that way over the plain with a keen and rapid
glance, and then rejoined Rodolph, running quickly.

"Will you explain to me the meaning of all this?"

"Patience, patience, good master; one word more. What's o'clock?"

"Half past twelve," said Rodolph, looking at his watch.

"All right; we have time, then. The Chouette will not be here for the
next half-hour."

"The Chouette!" cried Rodolph and the girl both at once.

"Yes, the Chouette; in two words, master, I'll tell you all. Yesterday,
after you had left the _tapis-franc_, there came--"

"A tall man with a woman in man's attire, who asked for me; I know all
about that, but then--"

"Then they paid for my liquor, and wanted to 'draw' me about you. I had
nothing to tell them, because you had communicated nothing to me, except
those fisticuffs which settled me. All I know is, that I learned
something then which I shall not easily forget. But we are friends for
life and death, Master Rodolph, though the devil burn me if I know why.
I feel for you the regard which the bulldog feels for his master. It was
after you told me that I had 'heart and honour;' but that's nothing, so
there's an end of it. It is no use trying to account for it; so it is,
and so let it be, if it's any good to you."

"Many thanks, my man; but go on."

"The tall man and the little lady in men's clothes, finding that they
could get nothing out of me, left the ogress's, and so did I; they going
towards the Palais de Justice, and I to Notre Dame. On reaching the end
of the street I found it was raining pitchforks, points downward,--a
complete deluge. There was an old house in ruins close at hand, and I
said to myself, 'If this shower is to last all night, I shall sleep as
well here as in my own "crib."' So I rolled myself into a sort of cave,
where I was high and dry; my bed was an old beam, and my pillow a heap
of lath and plaster, and there I slept like a king."

"Well, well, go on."

"We had drank together, Master Rodolph; I had drank, too, with the tall
man and the little woman dressed in man's clothes, so you may believe my
head was rather heavy, and, besides, nothing sends me off to sleep like
a good fall of rain. I began then to snooze, but I had not been long
asleep, I think, when, aroused by a noise, I sat up and listened. I
heard the Schoolmaster, who was talking in a friendly tone with
somebody. I soon made out that he was parleying with the tall man who
came into the _tapis-franc_ with the little woman dressed in man's
clothes."

"They in conference with the Schoolmaster and the Chouette?" said
Rodolph, with amazement.

"With the Schoolmaster and the Chouette; and they agreed to meet again
on the morrow."

"That's to-day!" said Rodolph.

"At one o'clock."

"This very moment!"

"Where the road branches off to St. Denis and La Revolte."

"This very spot!"

"Just as you say, Master Rodolph, on this very spot."

"The Schoolmaster! Oh, pray be on your guard, M. Rodolph," exclaimed
Fleur-de-Marie.

"Don't be alarmed, my child, he won't come; it's only the Chouette."

"How could the man who, with the female in disguise, sought me at the
_tapis-franc_, come into contact with these two wretches?" said Rodolph.

"I'faith I don't know, and I think I only awoke at the end of the
affair, for the tall man was talking of getting back his pocketbook,
which the Chouette was to bring here in exchange for five hundred
francs. I should say that the Schoolmaster had begun by robbing him, and
that it was after that that they began to parley, and to come to
friendly terms."

"It is very strange."

"_Mon Dieu!_ it makes me quite frightened on your account, M. Rodolph,"
said Fleur-de-Marie.

"Master Rodolph is no chicken, girl; but as you say, there may be
something working against him, and so I am here."

"Go on, my good fellow."

"The tall man and the little woman have promised two thousand francs to
the Schoolmaster to do to you--I don't know what. The Chouette is to be
here directly to return the pocketbook, and to know what is required
from them, which she is to tell the Schoolmaster, who will undertake
it."

Fleur-de-Marie started. Rodolph smiled disdainfully.

"Two thousand francs to do something to you, Master Rodolph; that makes
me think that when I see a notice of a dog that has been lost (I don't
mean to make a comparison), and the offer of a hundred francs reward for
his discovery, I say to myself, 'Animal, if you were lost, no one would
give a hundred farthings to find you.' Two thousand francs to do
something to you! Who are you, then?"

"I'll tell you by and by."

"That's enough, master. When I heard this proposal, I said to myself, I
must find out where these two dons live who want to set the Schoolmaster
on the haunches of M. Rodolph; it may be serviceable. So when they had
gone away, I got out of my hiding-place, and followed them quietly. I
saw the tall man and little woman get into a coach near Notre Dame, and
I got up behind, and we went on until we reached the Boulevard de
l'Observatoire. It was as dark as the mouth of an oven, and I could not
distinguish anything, so I cut a notch in a tree, that I might find out
the place in the morning."

"Well thought of, my good fellow."

"This morning I went there, and about ten yards from the tree I saw a
narrow entrance, closed by a gate. In the mud there were little and
large footsteps, and at the end of the entrance a small garden-gate,
where the traces ended; so the roosting-place of the tall man and the
little woman must be there."

"Thanks, my worthy friend, you have done me a most essential piece of
service, without knowing it."

"I beg your pardon, Master Rodolph, but I believed I was serving you,
and that was the reason I did as I did."

"I know it, my fine fellow, and I wish I could recompense your service
more properly than by thanks; but, unfortunately, I am only a poor devil
of a workman, although you say they offer two thousand francs for
something to be done against me. I will explain that to you."

"Yes, if you like, but not unless. Somebody threatens you with
something, and I will come across them if I can; the rest is your
affair."

"I know what they want. Listen to me. I have a secret for cutting fans
in ivory by a mechanical process, but this secret does not belong to me
alone. I am awaiting my comrade to go to work, and, no doubt, it is the
model of the machine which I have at home that they are desirous of
getting from me at any price, for there is a great deal of money to be
made by this discovery."

"The tall man and the little woman then are--"

"Work-people with whom I have been associated, and to whom I have
refused my secret."

This explanation appeared satisfactory to the Chourineur, whose
apprehension was not the clearest in the world, and he replied:

"Now I understand it all. The beggars! you see they have not the courage
to do their dirty tricks themselves. But to come to the end of my story.
I said to myself this morning, I know the rendezvous of the Chouette and
the tall man; I will go there and wait for them; I have good legs, and
my employer will wait for me. I came here and found this hole, and,
taking an armful of stuff from the dunghill yonder, I hid myself here up
to my nose, and waited for the Chouette. But, lo and behold! you came
into the field, and poor Goualeuse came and sat down on the very edge of
my park, and then I determined to have a bit of fun, and, jumping out of
my lair, I called out like a man on fire."

"And now what do you propose to do?"

"To wait for the Chouette, who is sure to come first; to try and
overhear what she and the tall man talk about, for that may be useful
for you to know. There is nothing in the field but this trunk of a tree,
and from here you may see all over the plain; it is as if it were made
on purpose to sit down upon. The rendezvous of the Chouette is only four
steps off at the cross-road, and I will lay a bet they come and sit here
when they arrive. If I cannot hear anything, then, as soon as they
separate, I will follow the Chouette, who is sure to stay last, and I'll
pay her the old grudge I owe her for the Goualeuse's tooth; and I'll
twist her neck until she tells me the name of the parents of the poor
girl, for she says she knows them. What do you think of my idea, Master
Rodolph?"

"I like it very well, my lad; but there is one part which you must
alter."

"Oh, Chourineur, do not get yourself into any quarrel on my account. If
you beat the Chouette, then the Schoolmaster--"

"Say no more, my lass. The Chouette shall not go scot free for me.
Confound it! why, for the very reason that the Schoolmaster will defend
her, I will double her dose."

"Listen, my man, to me; I have a better plan for avenging the Chouette's
brutalities to Goualeuse, which I will tell you hereafter. Now," said
Rodolph, moving a few paces from Goualeuse, and speaking low, "Now, will
you render me a real service?"

"Name it, Master Rodolph."

"The Chouette does not know you?"

"I saw her yesterday for the first time at the _tapis-franc_."

"This is what you must do. Hide yourself first; but, when you see her
come close to you, get out of this hole--"

"And twist her neck?"

"No, defer that for a time. To-day, only prevent her from speaking to
the tall man. He, seeing some one with her, will not approach; and if he
does, do not leave her alone for a moment. He cannot make his proposal
before you."

"If the man thinks me curious, I know what to do; he is neither the
Schoolmaster nor Master Rodolph. I will follow the Chouette like her
shadow, and the man shall not say a word that I do not overhear. He will
then be off, and after that I will have one little turn with the
Chouette. I must have it; it will be such a sweet drop for me."

"Not yet; the one-eyed hag does not know whether you are a thief or
not?"

"No, not unless the Schoolmaster has talked of me to her, and told her
that I did not do business in that line."

"If he have, you must appear to have altered your ideas on that
subject."

"I?"

"Yes."

"Ten thousand thunders! M. Rodolph, what do you mean? Indeed--truly--I
don't like it; it does not suit me to play such a farce as that."

"You shall only do what you please; but you will not find that I shall
suggest any infamous plan to you. The tall man once driven away, you
must try and talk over the Chouette. As she will be very savage at
having missed the good haul she expected, you must try and smooth her
down by telling her that you know of a capital bit of business which may
be done, and that you are then waiting for your comrade, and that, if
the Schoolmaster will join you, there is a lump of money to be made."

"Well, well."

"After waiting with her for an hour, you may say, 'My mate does not
come, and so the job must be put off;' and then you may make an
appointment with the Chouette and the Schoolmaster for to-morrow, at an
early hour. Do you understand me?"

"Quite."

"And this evening, at ten o'clock, meet me at the corner of the Champs
Elysées and the Allée des Veuves, and I will tell you more."

"If it is a trap, look out! The Schoolmaster is a scoundrel. You have
beaten him, and, no doubt, he will kill you if he can."

"Have no fear."

"By Jove! it is a 'rum start;' but do as you like with me. I do not
hesitate, for something tells me that there is a rod in pickle for the
Schoolmaster and the Chouette. One word, though, if you please, M.
Rodolph."

"Say it."

"I do not think you are the man to lay a trap, and set the police on the
Schoolmaster. He is an arrant blackguard, who deserves a hundred deaths;
but to have them arrested, that I will not have a hand in."

"Nor I, my boy; but I have a score to wipe off with him and the
Chouette, because they are in a plot with others against me; but we two
will baffle them completely, if you will lend me your assistance."

"Of course I will; and, if that is to be the game, I am your man. But
quick, quick," cried the Chourineur, "down there I see the head of the
Chouette. I know it is her bonnet. Go, go, and I will drop into my
hole."

"To-night, then, at ten o'clock."

"At the corner of the Champs Elysées and the Allée des Veuves; all
right."

Fleur-de-Marie had not heard a word of the latter part of the
conversation between the Chourineur and Rodolph, and now entered again
into the coach with her travelling companion.




CHAPTER X.

CASTLES IN THE AIR.


For some time after this conversation with the Chourineur, Rodolph
remained preoccupied and pensive, while Fleur-de-Marie, too timid to
break the silence, continued to gaze on him with saddened earnestness.
At length Rodolph looked up, and, meeting her mournful look, smiled
kindly on her, and said, "What are you thinking of, my child? I fear our
rencontre with the Chourineur has made you uncomfortable, and we were so
merry, too."

"Oh, no, M. Rodolph, indeed, I do not mind it at all; nay, I even
believe the meeting with the Chourineur may be useful to you."

"Did not this man pass amongst the inhabitants of the _tapis-franc_ as
possessing some good points among his many bad ones?"

"Indeed, I know not, M. Rodolph; for although, previously to the scene
of yesterday, I had frequently seen him, I had scarcely ever spoken to
him. I always looked upon him as bad as all the rest."

"Well, well, do not let us talk any more about him, my pretty
Fleur-de-Marie. I should be sorry, indeed, to make you sad,--I, who
brought you out purposely that you might spend a happy day."

"Oh, I am happy. It is so very long since I have been out of Paris."

"Not since your grand doings with Rigolette."

"Yes, indeed, M. Rodolph; but that was in the spring. Yet, though it is
now autumn, I enjoy it quite as much. How beautifully the sun shines!
Only look at the gold-coloured clouds out there--there, I mean; and then
that hill, with its pretty white houses half hid among the trees, and
the leaves still so green, though we are in the middle of the month of
October. Do not you think it is wonderful, M. Rodolph, they should so
well preserve their verdure? In Paris, all the leaves wither so soon.
Look! look at those pigeons! how many there are! and how high they fly!
Now they are settling on that old mill. One is never tired in the open
fields of looking at all these amusing sights."

"It, is, indeed, a pleasure to behold the delight you seem to take in
all these trifling matters, Fleur-de-Marie; though they, in reality,
constitute the charm of a landscape."

And Rodolph was right; for the countenance of his companion, while
gazing upon the fair, calm scene before her, was lit up with an
expression of the purest joy.

"See!" she exclaimed, after intently watching the different objects that
unfolded themselves to her eager look, "see how beautifully the clear
white smoke rises from those cottages, and ascends to the very clouds
themselves; and there are some men ploughing the land. What a capital
plough they have got, drawn by those two fine gray horses. Oh, if I were
a man, how I should like to be a husbandman, to go out in the fields,
and drive one's own plough; and then when you look to see the blue
skies, and the green shiny leaves of the neighbouring forests,--such a
day as to-day, for instance, when you feel half inclined to weep,
without knowing why, and begin singing old and melancholy songs, like
'Geneviève de Brabant.' Do you know 'Geneviève de Brabant,' M. Rodolph?"

"No, my child; but I hope you will have the kindness to sing it to me
before the day is over. You know our time is all our own."

At these words, which reminded the poor Goualeuse that her newly tasted
happiness was fast fleeting away, and that, at the close of this, the
brightest day that had ever shone on her existence, she must return to
all the horrors of a corrupt city, her feelings broke through all
restraint, she hid her face in her hands and burst into tears. Much
surprised at her emotion, Rodolph kindly inquired its cause.

"What ails you, Fleur-de-Marie? What fresh grief have you found?"

"Nothing,--nothing indeed, M. Rodolph," replied the girl, drying her
eyes and trying to smile. "Pray forgive me for being so sad, and please
not to notice it. I assure you I have nothing at all to grieve
about,--it is only a fancy; and now I am going to be quite gay, you will
see."

"And you were as gay as could be a few minutes ago."

"Yes, I know I was; and it was my thinking how soon--" answered
Fleur-de-Marie, naïvely, and raising her large, tearful blue eyes, with
touching candour, to his face.

The look, the words, fully enlightened Rodolph as to the cause of her
distress, and, wishing to dissipate it, he said, smilingly:

"I would lay a wager you are regretting your poor rose-tree, and are
crying because you could not bring it out walking with you, as you used
to do."

La Goualeuse fell into the good-natured scheme for regaining her
cheerfulness, and by degrees the clouds of sadness cleared away from her
fair young face; and once again she appeared absorbed in the pleasure of
the moment, without allowing herself to recollect the future that would
succeed it. The vehicle had by this time almost arrived at St. Denis,
and the tall spires of the cathedral were visible.

"Oh, what a fine steeple!" exclaimed La Goualeuse.

"It is that of the splendid church of St. Denis: would you like to see
it? We can easily stop our carriage."

Poor Fleur-de-Marie cast down her eyes. "From the hour I went to live
with the ogress," said she, in a low tone, while deep blushes dyed her
cheek, "I never once entered a church,--I durst not. When in prison, on
the contrary, I used to delight in helping to sing the mass; and,
against the Fête-Dieu, oh, I made such lovely bouquets for the altar!"

"But God is merciful and good; why, then, fear to pray to him, or to
enter his holy church?"

"Oh, no, no, M. Rodolph! I have offended God deeply enough; let me not
add impiety and sacrilege to my sins."

After a moment's silence, Rodolph again renewed the conversation, and,
kindly taking the hand of La Goualeuse, said, "Fleur-de-Marie, tell me
honestly, have you ever known what it is to love?"

"Never, M. Rodolph."

"And how do you account for this?"

"You saw the kind of persons who frequented the _tapis-franc_. And then,
to love, the object should be good and virtuous--"

"Why do you think so?"

"Oh, because one's lover, or husband, would be all in all to us, and we
should seek no greater happiness than devoting our life to him. But, M.
Rodolph, if you please, we will talk of something else, for the tears
will come into my eyes."

"Willingly, Fleur-de-Marie; let us change the conversation. And now tell
me, why do you look so beseechingly at me with those large, tearful
eyes? Have I done anything to displease you?"

"On the contrary, 'tis the excess of your goodness that makes me weep;
indeed, I could almost fancy that you had brought me out solely for my
individual pleasure and enjoyment, without thinking of yourself. Not
content with your generous defence of me yesterday, you have to-day
procured for me happiness such as I never hoped to enjoy."

"You are, then, truly and entirely happy?"

"Never, never shall I forget to-day."

"Happiness does not often attend us on earth," said Rodolph, sighing.

"Alas, no! Seldom, perhaps never."

"For my own part, to make up for a want of reality in its possession, I
often amuse myself with pictures of what I would have if I could, saying
to myself, this is how, and where, I should like to live,--this is the
sort of income I should like to enjoy. Have you never, my little
Fleur-de-Marie, amused yourself with building similar 'castles in the
air?'"

"Yes, formerly, when I was in prison, before I went to live with the
ogress,--then I used to do nothing all day but dance, sing, and build
these fairy dreams; but I very seldom do so now. Tell me, M. Rodolph, if
you could have any wish you liked, what should you most desire?"

"Oh, I should like to be rich, with plenty of servants and carriages; to
possess a splendid hôtel, and to mix in the first circles of fashion; to
be able to obtain any amusement I pleased, and to go to the theatres and
opera whenever I chose."

"Well, then, you would be more unreasonable than I should. Now I will
tell you exactly what would satisfy me in every respect: first of all,
sufficient money to clear myself with the ogress, and to keep me till I
could obtain work for my future support; then a pretty, little, nice,
clean room, all to myself, from the window of which I could see the
trees while I sat at my work."

"Plenty of flowers in your casement, of course?"

"Oh, certainly! And, if it could be managed, to live in the country
always. And that, I think, is all I should want."

"Let me see: a little room, and work enough to maintain you,--those are
positive necessaries; but, when one is merely wishing, there is no harm
in adding a few superfluities. Should you not like such nice things as
carriages, diamonds, and rich clothes?"

"Not at all! All I wish for is my free and undisturbed liberty,--a
country life, and the certainty of not dying in a hospital. Oh, that
idea is dreadful! Above all things, I would desire the certainty of its
never being my fate. Oh, M. Rodolph, that dread often comes across me
and fills me with terror."

"Alas! poor folks, such as we are, should not shrink from such things."

"'Tis not the dying in a charitable institution I dread, or the poverty
that would send me into it, but the thoughts of what they do to your
lifeless remains."

"What do they do that shocks you so much?"

"Is it possible, M. Rodolph, you have never been told what will become
of you if you die in one of those places?"

"No, indeed, I have not; do you tell me."

"Well, then, I knew a young girl, who had been a sort of companion to me
when I was in prison; she afterwards died in a hospital, and what do you
think? Her body was given to the surgeons for dissection!" murmured the
shuddering Fleur-de-Marie.

"That is, indeed, a frightful idea! And do these miserable anticipations
often trouble you, my poor girl?"

"Ah, M. Rodolph, it surprises you that, after my unhappy life, I can
feel any concern as to what becomes of my miserable remains! God knows,
the feeling which makes me shrink from such an outrage to modesty is all
my wretched fate has left me!"

The mournful tone in which these words were uttered, and the bitter
feelings they contained, went to the heart of Rodolph; but his
companion, quickly perceiving his air of dejection, and blaming herself
for having caused it, said, timidly:

"M. Rodolph, I feel that I am behaving very ill and ungratefully towards
you, who so kindly brought me out to amuse me and give me pleasure; in
return for which I only keep talking to you about all the dull and
gloomy things I can think of! I wonder how I can do so!--to be able even
to recollect my misery, when all around me smiles and looks so gay! I
cannot tell how it is, words seem to rise from my lips in spite of
myself; and, though I feel happier to-day than I ever did before in my
life, my eyes are continually filling with tears! You are not angry with
me, are you, M. Rodolph? See, too, my sadness is going away as suddenly
as it came. There now, it is all gone, and shall not return to vex you
any more, I am determined. Look, M. Rodolph, just look at my eyes,--they
do not show that I have been crying, do they?"

And here Fleur-de-Marie, having repeatedly closed her eyes to get rid of
the rebellious tears that would gather there, opened them full upon
Rodolph, with a look of most enchanting candour and sweetness.

"Put no restraint on yourself, I beseech you, Fleur-de-Marie: be gay, if
you really feel so; or sad, if sadness most suits your present state of
mind. I have my own hours of gloom and melancholy, and my sufferings
would be much increased were I compelled to feign a lightness of heart I
did not really possess."

"Can it be possible, M. Rodolph, that you are ever sad?"

"Quite possible, my child, and true. Alas! the prospect before me is but
little brighter than your own. I, like you, am without friends or
parents; what would become of me if I were to fall ill and be unable to
earn my daily bread,--for I need scarcely tell you I live but from day
to day, and spend my money quite as fast as I obtain it?"

"Oh, but that is wrong, M. Rodolph,--very, very wrong!" said La
Goualeuse, in a tone of such deep and grave remonstrance as made him
smile. "You should always lay by something. Look at me: why, all my
troubles and misfortunes have happened because I did not save my money
more carefully. If once a person can get a hundred francs beforehand, he
need never fear falling into any one's power; generally, a difficulty
about money puts very evil thoughts into our head."

"All that is very wise and very sensible, my frugal little friend; but a
hundred francs!--that is a large sum; how could a man like myself ever
amass so much?"

"Why, M. Rodolph, it is really very easy, if you will but consider a
little. First of all, I think you said you could earn five francs a
day?"

"Yes, so I can, when I choose to work."

"Ah! but you should work, constantly and regularly; and yours is such a
pretty trade. To paint fans! how nice such work must be,--mere
amusement, quite a recreation! I cannot think why you should ever be
tired or dull. Indeed, M. Rodolph, I must tell you plainly I do not pity
you at all; and, besides, really you talk like a mere child when you say
you cannot save money out of such large earnings," added La Goualeuse,
in a sweet, but, for her, severe tone. "Why, a workman may live well
upon three francs a day; there remain forty sous; at the end of a month,
if you manage prudently, you will have saved sixty francs. Think of
that! There's a sum!--sixty francs in one month!"

"Oh, but one likes to show off sometimes, and to indulge in a little
idleness."

"There now, M. Rodolph, I declare you make me quite angry to hear you
talk so childishly! Pray let me advise you to be wiser."

"Come, then, my sage little monitress, I will be a good boy, and listen
to all your careful advice. And your idea of saving, too, is a
remarkably good one; I never thought of it before."

"Really!" exclaimed the poor girl, clapping her hands with joy. "Oh, if
you knew how delighted I am to hear you say so! Then you will begin from
to-day to lay by the forty sous we were talking about, will you? Will
you, indeed?"

"I give you my honour that, from this very hour, I will resolve to
follow up your most excellent plan, and save forty sous out of each
day's pay."

"Are you quite, quite sure you will?"

"Nay, have I not promised you that I will?"

"You will see how proud and happy you will be with your first savings;
and that is not all--ah, if you would promise not to be angry!"

"Do I look as though I could be so unkind, Fleur-de-Marie, as to find
fault with anything you said?"

"Oh, no, indeed, that you do not; only I hardly know whether I ought--"

"You ought to tell me everything you think or feel, Fleur-de-Marie."

"Well, then, I was wondering how _you_, who, it is easily seen, are
above your condition, can frequent such low cabarets as that kept by the
ogress."

"Had I not done so, I should not have had the pleasure of wandering in
the fields with you to-day, my dear Fleur-de-Marie."

"That is, indeed, true, M. Rodolph; but, still, it does not alter my
first opinion. No, much as I enjoy to-day's treat, I would cheerfully
give up all thoughts of ever passing such another if I thought it could
in any way injure you."

"Injure me! Far from it! Think of the excellent advice you have been
giving me."

"Which you have promised me to follow?"

"I have; and I pledge my word of honour to save henceforward at least
forty sous a day." Thus speaking, Rodolph called out to the driver of
their vehicle, who was passing the village of Sarcelles, "Take the first
road to the right, cross Villiers to Bel, turn to the left, then keep
along quite straight."

"Now," said Rodolph, turning to his companion, "that I am a good boy,
and promised to do all you tell me, let us go back to our diversion of
building castles in the air: that does not run away with much money. You
will not object to such a method of amusing myself, will you?"

"Oh, no, build as many as you like, they are very cheaply raised, and
very easily knocked down when you are tired of them. Now, then, you
begin."

"Well, then--No! Fleur-de-Marie, you shall build up yours first."

"I wonder if you could guess what I should choose, if wishing were all,
M. Rodolph."

"Let us try. Suppose that this road--I say _this_ road, because we
happen to be on it--"

"Yes, yes, of course; this road is as good as any other."

"Well, then, I say, I suppose that this road leads to a delightful
little village, at a considerable distance from the highroad--"

"Oh, yes; that makes it so much more still and quiet!"

"It is built facing the south, and half surrounded by trees--"

"And close by flows a gentle river."

"Exactly!--a clear, gently flowing river. At the end of this village
stands a pretty farm, with a nice orchard on one side of it, and a
garden, filled with flowers, on the other--"

"That farm shall be called my farm, to which we will pretend we are now
going."

"Just so."

"And where we know we shall get some delicious milk to drink after our
journey!"

"Milk, indeed! Excellent cream, and newly laid eggs, if you please."

"And where we would be glad to stay all our lives!"

"All our lives! Quite right,--go on."

"And then we should go and see all the cows!"

"To be sure we should."

"And afterwards visit the dairy?"

"Visit the dairy! Yes."

"Then the pigeon-house?"

"Yes, so we should."

"Oh, how very, very nice, only to think of such things!"

"But let me finish the description of the farm--"

"Yes, pray do! I quite forgot that."

"Well, then, the ground floor contains two rooms; one, a large kitchen
for the farm servants, and the other for the owner of the place."

"Make that room have green blinds, M. Rodolph,--do, pray; they are so
cool, and look so pretty!"

"Yes, yes,--green blinds to the windows. I quite agree with you,--they
do look uncommonly pretty, and set off a place so well! Of course, the
person tenanting this farm is your aunt."

"Of course she is my aunt, and a very good, sensible, kind woman, M.
Rodolph, is she not?"

"Particularly so, and loves you like her own child."

"Dear, good aunt! Oh, how delightful to have some one to love us!"

"And you return the tender affection she bears you?"

"Oh, with all my heart!" exclaimed Fleur-de-Marie, clasping her hands,
and raising her eyes to heaven with an expression impossible to
describe. "And I should help her to work, to attend to the family linen,
to keep everything neat and clean, to store up the summer fruits against
winter--oh, she would never have to complain that I was idle, I promise!
First of all, in the morning--"

"Wait a bit, Fleur-de-Marie; you are in too great a hurry. I want to
finish describing the house to you; never mind your aunt just yet."

"Ah, ha, Mr. Painter! All this is taken from some pretty landscape you
have been painting on a fan. Now I know what makes you so expert at
describing it!" said La Goualeuse, laughing merrily at her own little
jest.

"You little chatterer, be quiet, will you?"

"Yes, I am a chatterer, indeed, to interrupt you so often, M. Rodolph;
but pray go on, and I will not speak again till you have finished
painting this dear farm."

"Your room is on the first floor--"

"My room! how charming! Oh, go on--go on, please, M. Rodolph, and
describe all about it to me!" And the delighted girl opened her large
laughing eyes, and pressed more closely against Rodolph, as if she
expected to see the picture in his hand.

"Your chamber has two windows looking out upon the flower garden, and a
small meadow, watered by the river we mentioned. On the opposite bank of
the stream rises a small hill, planted with fine old chestnut-trees; and
from amongst them peeps out the village church--"

"Oh, how beautiful,--how very beautiful, M. Rodolph! It makes one quite
long to be there."

"Three or four fine cows are grazing in the meadow, which is only
separated from the garden by a hedge of honeysuckle--"

"And from my windows I can see the cows?"

"Perfectly."

"And one among them ought to be my favourite, you know, M. Rodolph; and
I ought to put a little bell round its neck, and use it to feed out of
my hands!"

"Of course she would come when you called her. Let me see, what name
shall we give her? Suppose we say, Musette. Do you like that? She shall
be very young and gentle, and entirely white."

"Oh, what a pretty name! Musette! Ah, Musette, Musette, I shall be
always feeding you and patting you to make you know me."

"Now we will finish the inside of your apartment, Fleur-de-Marie. The
curtains and furniture are green, like the blinds; and outside the
window grow an enormous rose-tree and honeysuckle, which entirely cover
this side of the farm, and so surround your casements that you have only
to stretch out your hand to gather a large bunch of roses and
honeysuckle wet with the early morning dew."

"Ah, M. Rodolph, what a good painter you are!"

"Now this is the way you will pass your day--"

"Yes, yes, let us see how I shall employ myself all day."

"Early in the morning your good aunt wakes you with a tender kiss; she
brings with her a bowl of new milk, just warm, which she prays you to
drink, as she fancies you are delicate about the lungs, poor dear child!
Well, you do as she wishes you; then rise, and take a walk around the
farm; pay a visit to Musette, the poultry, your pets the pigeons, the
flowers in the garden, till nine o'clock, when your writing-master
arrives--"

"My writing-master?"

"Why, you know, unless you learned such necessary things as reading,
writing, and accounts, you would not be able to assist your aunt to keep
her books relative to the produce of the farm."

"Oh, to be sure! How very stupid of me not to recollect that I must
learn to write well, if I wished to help my aunt!" cried the young girl,
so thoroughly absorbed in the picture of this peaceful life as to
believe for the moment in its reality.

"After your lesson is concluded, you will occupy yourself in household
matters, or embroider some pretty little article of dress for yourself;
then you will practise your writing for an hour or two, and, when that
is done, join your aunt in her round of visits to the different
operations of the farm; in the summer, to see how the reapers get on in
the hay field; in harvest-time, to observe the reapers, and afterwards
to enjoy the delight with which the gleaners pick up the scattered ears
of grain; by this time you will have almost tired yourself, and
gathering a large handful of wild herbs, carefully selected by you as
the known favourites of your dear Musette, you turn your steps
homewards--"

"But we go back through the meadow, dear M. Rodolph, do we not?"
inquired La Goualeuse, as earnestly as though every syllable her ears
drank in was to be effectually brought to pass.

"Oh, yes! by all means; and there happens, fortunately, to be a nice
little bridge, by which the river separating the farm-land from the
meadow may be crossed. By the time you reach home, upon my word, it is
seven o'clock; and, as the evenings begin to be a little chill, a
bright, cheerful fire is blazing in the large farm kitchen; you go in
there for a few minutes, just to warm yourself and to speak a few kind
words to the honest labourers, who are enjoying a hearty meal after the
day's toil is over. Then you sit down to dinner with your aunt;
sometimes the curé, or a neighbouring farmer, is invited to share the
meal. After dinner you read or work, while your aunt and her guest have
a friendly game at piquet. At ten o'clock she dismisses you, with a kiss
and a blessing, to your chamber; you retire to your room, offer prayers
and thanksgivings to the Great Author of all your happiness, then sleep
soundly till morning, when the same routine begins again."

"Oh, M. Rodolph, one might lead such a life as that for a hundred years,
without ever knowing one moment's weariness."

"But that is not all. There are Sundays and fête-days to be thought of."

"Yes; and how should we pass those?"

"Why, you would put on your holiday dress, with one of those pretty
little caps _à la paysanne_, which all admit you look so very nicely in,
and accompany your aunt in her large old-fashioned chaise, driven by
James the farm servant, to hear mass in the village church; after which,
during summer, your kind relative would take you to the different fêtes
given in the adjoining parishes. You, so gentle, so modest and
good-looking, so tenderly beloved by your aunt, and so well spoken of by
the curé for all the virtues and qualifications which make a good wife,
will have no scarcity of offers for your hand in the dance,--indeed, all
the principal young farmers will be anxious to secure you as a partner,
by way of opening an acquaintance which shall last for life. By degrees
you begin to remark one more than the others; you perceive his deep
desire to attract your undivided attention, and so--" And here Rodolph,
struck by the continued silence of La Goualeuse, looked up at her. Alas!
the poor girl was endeavouring, though fruitlessly, to choke the deep
sobs which almost suffocated her. For a brief period, carried away by
the words of Rodolph, the bright future presented to her mental vision
had effaced the horrible present; but too quickly did the hideous
picture return, and sweep away for ever the dear delight of believing so
sweet, so calm an existence could ever be hers.

"Fleur-de-Marie," asked Rodolph, in a kind and affectionate tone, "why
is this? Why these tears?"

"Ah, M. Rodolph, you have unintentionally caused me much pain. Foolish
girl that I was, I had listened to you till I quite fancied this
paradise were a true picture."

"And so it is, my dear child! This paradise, as you call it, is no
fiction."

"Stop, coachman!"

"Now look! see! observe where we are!"

As the carriage stopped, La Goualeuse, at Rodolph's bidding,
mechanically raised her head,--they were on the summit of a little
hill. What was her surprise, her astonishment, at the scene which
revealed itself to her gaze! The pretty village, built facing the south,
the farm, the meadow, the beautiful cows, the little winding river, the
chestnut grove, the church in the distance,--the whole picture, so
vividly painted, was before her eyes. Nothing was wanting,--even the
milk-white heifer, Musette, her future pet, was peacefully grazing as
she had been described. The rich colouring of an October sun gilded the
charming landscape, while the variegated tint of the chestnut-leaves,
slightly tinged by the autumnal breezes, stood out in bold relief
against the clear blue of the surrounding sky.

"Well, my little Fleur-de-Marie, what do you say to this? Am I a good
painter, or not?"

La Goualeuse looked at him with a surprise in which a degree of
uneasiness was mingled; all she saw and heard appeared to her to partake
largely of the supernatural.

"M. Rodolph," she at length exclaimed, with a bewildered look, "how can
this be? Indeed, indeed, I feel afraid to look at it,--it is so exactly
alike. I cannot believe it is anything but a dream you have conjured up,
and which will quickly pass away. Speak to me! pray do; and tell me what
to believe."

"Calm yourself, my dear child! Nothing is more simple or true than what
you behold here. The good woman who owns this farm was my nurse, and
brought me up here; intending to give myself a treat, I sent to her
early this morning to say I was coming to see her. You see I painted
after nature."

"You are quite right, M. Rodolph," sighed La Goualeuse. "There is,
indeed, nothing but what is quite natural in all this."

The farm to which Rodolph had conducted Fleur-de-Marie was situated at
the outer extremity of the village of Bouqueval,--a small, isolated, and
unknown hamlet, entirely surrounded by its own lands, and about two
leagues' distance from Ecouen; the vehicle, following the directions of
Rodolph, rapidly descended the hill, and entered a long avenue bordered
with apple and cherry trees, while the wheels rolled noiselessly over
the short fine grass with which the unfrequented road was overgrown.

Fleur-de-Marie, whose utmost efforts were unavailing to shake off the
painful sensations she experienced, remained so silent and mournful that
Rodolph reproached himself with having, by his well-intentioned
surprise, been the cause of it. In a few moments more, the carriage,
passing by the large entrance to the farm, entered a thick avenue of
elm-trees, and stopped before a little rustic porch, half hidden by the
luxuriant branches of the vine which clustered round it.

"Now, Fleur-de-Marie, here we are. Are you pleased with what you see?"

"Indeed I am, M. Rodolph. But how shall I venture before the good person
you mentioned as living here? Pray do not let her see me,--I cannot
venture to approach her."

"And why, my child?"

"True, M. Rodolph; I forget she does not know me, and will not guess how
unworthy I am." And poor Fleur-de-Marie tried to suppress the deep sigh
that would accompany her words.

The arrival of Rodolph had, no doubt, been watched for; the driver had
scarcely opened the carriage door when a prepossessing female, of middle
age, dressed in the style of wealthy landholders about Paris, and whose
countenance, though melancholy, was also gentle and benevolent in its
expression, appeared in the porch, and with respectful eagerness
advanced to meet Rodolph.

Poor Goualeuse felt her cheeks flush and her heart beat as she timidly
descended from the vehicle.

"Good day, good day, Madame Georges," said Rodolph, advancing towards
the individual so addressed, "you see I am punctual." Then turning to
the driver, and putting money into his hand, he said, "Here, my friend,
there is no further occasion to detain you; you may return to Paris as
soon as you please."

The coachman, a little, short, square-built man, with his hat over his
eyes, and his countenance almost entirely concealed by the high collar
of his driving-coat, pocketed the money without a word, remounted his
seat, gave his horses the whip, and disappeared down the _allée verte_
by which he had entered.

Fleur-de-Marie sprang to the side of Rodolph, and with an air of
unfeigned alarm, almost amounting to distress, said, in a tone so low as
not to be overheard by Madame Georges:

"M. Rodolph! M. Rodolph! pray do not be angry, but why have you sent
away the carriage? Will it not return to fetch us away?"

"Of course not; I have quite done with the man, and therefore dismissed
him."

"But the ogress!"

"What of her? Why do you mention her name?"

"Alas! alas! because I must return to her this evening; indeed, indeed,
I must, or--or she will consider me a thief. The very clothes I have on
are hers, and, besides, I owe her--"

"Make yourself quite easy, my dear child; it is my part to ask your
forgiveness, not you mine."

"My forgiveness! Oh, for what can you require me to pardon you?"

"For not having sooner told you that you no longer owe the ogress
anything; that it rests only with yourself to decide whether you will
henceforward make this quiet spot your home, and cast off the garments
you now wear for others my kind friend, Madame Georges, will furnish you
with. She is much about your height, and can supply you with everything
you require. She is all impatience to commence her part of 'aunt,' I
can assure you."

Poor Fleur-de-Marie seemed utterly unable to comprehend the meaning of
all she saw and heard, and gazed with wondering and perplexed looks from
one companion to the other, as though fearing to trust either her eyes
or ears.

"Do I understand you rightly?" she cried at length, half breathless with
emotion. "Not go back to Paris? Remain here? And this lady will permit
me to stay with her? Oh, it cannot be possible; I dare not hope it; that
would, indeed, be to realise our 'castles in the air.'"

"Dear Fleur-de-Marie, your wishes are realised,--your dream a true one."

"No, no, you must be jesting; that would be too much happiness to
expect, or even dare to hope for."

"Nay, Fleur-de-Marie, we should never find fault with an oversupply of
happiness."

"Ah, M. Rodolph, for pity's sake deceive me not; you cannot believe the
misery I should experience were you to tell me all this happiness was
but a jest."

"My child, listen to me," said Rodolph, with a tone and manner which,
although still affectionate, was mingled with a dignified accent and
manner Fleur-de-Marie had never previously remarked in him. "I repeat
that, if you please, you may from this very hour lead here, with Madame
Georges, that peaceful life whose description but a short time since so
much delighted you. Though the kind lady with whom you will reside be
not your aunt, she will feel for you the most lively and affectionate
interest, and with the personages about the farm you will pass as being
really and truly her niece, and this innocent deception will render your
residence here more agreeable and advantageous. Once more I repeat to
you, Fleur-de-Marie, you may now at your own pleasure realise the dream
of our journey. As soon as you have assumed your village dress," said
Rodolph, smilingly, "we will take you to see that milk-white heifer,
Musette, who is to be your favourite henceforward, and who is only
waiting for the pretty collar you designed to ornament her with; then we
will go and introduce ourselves to your pets, the pigeons, afterwards
visit the dairy, and so go on till we have been all over the farm. I
mean to keep my promise in every respect, I assure you."

Fleur-de-Marie pressed her hands together with earnest gratitude.
Surprise, joy, and the deepest thankfulness, mingled with respect, lit
up her beautiful countenance, while, with eyes streaming with tears, she
exclaimed:

"M. Rodolph, you are, you must be, one of those beneficent angels sent
by the Almighty to do good upon earth, and to rescue poor fallen
creatures, like myself, from shame and misery."

"My poor girl," replied Rodolph, with a smile of deep sadness and
ineffable kindness, "though still young, I have already deeply suffered.
I lost a dear child, who, if living, would now be about your age. Let
that explain my deep sympathy with all who suffer, and for yourself
particularly, Fleur-de-Marie, or, rather, _Marie_ only. Now, go with
Madame Georges, who will shew you the pretty chamber, with its
clustering roses and honeysuckle to form your morning bouquets. Yes,
Marie, henceforward let that name, simple and sweet as yourself, be your
only appellation. Before my departure we will have some talk together,
and then I shall quit you, most happy in the knowledge of your full
contentment."

Fleur-de-Marie, without one word of reply, gracefully bent her knee,
and, before Rodolph could prevent her, gently and respectfully raised
his hand to her lips; then rising with an air of modest submission,
followed Madame Georges, who eyed her with a profound interest, out of
the room.




CHAPTER XI.

MURPHY AND RODOLPH.


Upon quitting the house, Rodolph bent his steps towards the farmyard,
where he found the individual who, the preceding evening, disguised as a
charcoal-man, had warned him of the arrival of Tom and Sarah. Murphy,
which was the name of this personage, was about fifty years of age; his
head, nearly bald, was still ornamented with a fringe of light brown
hair at each side, which the hand of time had here and there slightly
tinged with gray; his face was broad, open, and ruddy, and free from all
appearance of hair, except very short whiskers, of a reddish colour,
only reaching as low as the tip of the ear, from which it diverged, and
stretched itself in a gentle curve across his rubicund cheeks. Spite of
his years and _embonpoint_, Murphy was active and athletic; his
countenance, though somewhat phlegmatic, was expressive of great
resolution and kindliness of nature; he wore a white neck-handkerchief,
a deep waistcoat, and a long black coat, with very wide skirts; his
breeches, of an olive green colour, corresponded in material with the
gaiters which protected his sturdy legs, without reaching entirely to
the knee, but allowing the strings belonging to his upper garment to
display themselves in long unstudied bows; in fact, the dress and whole
_tournure_ of Murphy exactly accorded with the idea of what in England
is styled a "gentleman farmer." Now, the personage we are describing,
though an English squire, was no farmer. At the moment of Rodolph's
appearance in the yard, Murphy was in the act of depositing, in the
pocket of a small travelling _caléche_, a pair of small pistols he had
just been carefully cleaning.

"What the devil are you going to do with those pistols?" inquired
Rodolph.

"That is my business, my lord," replied Murphy, descending the carriage
steps; "attend to your affairs, and I will mind mine."

"At what o'clock have you ordered the horses?"

"According to your directions,--at nightfall."

"You got here this morning, I suppose?"

"I did, at eight o'clock. Madame Georges has had ample time to make all
the preparations you desired."

"What has gone wrong, Murphy? You seem completely out of humour. Have I
done anything to offend you?"

"Can you not, my lord, accomplish your self-imposed task without
incurring so much personal risk?"

"Surely, in order to lull all suspicion in the minds of the persons I
seek to understand and fully appreciate, I cannot do better than, for a
time, to adopt their garb, their language, and their customs."

"But all this did not prevent you, my lord, last night (in that
abominable place where we went to unkennel Bras Rouge, in hopes of
getting out of him some particulars relative to that unhappy son of
Madame Georges), from being angry, and ready to quarrel with me, because
I wished to aid in your tussle with the rascal you encountered in that
horrid cut-throat alley."

"I suppose, then, Murphy, you do not think I am capable of defending
myself, and you either doubt my courage or the strength of my arm?"

"Unfortunately, you have given me too many reasons to form a contrary
opinion of both. Thank God! Flatman, the Bertrand of Germany, perfected
you in the knowledge of fencing; Tom Cribb taught you to box; Lacour, of
Paris, accomplished you in single-stick, wrestling, and slang, so as to
render you fully provided for your venturesome excursions. You are bold
as a lion, with muscles like iron, and, though so slight in form, I
should have no more chance with you than a dray-horse would against a
racer, were they to compete with each other. No mistake about that."

"Then what are you afraid of?"

"Why, I maintain, my lord, that it is not the right thing for you to
throw yourself in the way of all these blackguards. I do not say that
because of the nuisance it is to a highly respectable individual of my
acquaintance to blacken his face with charcoal, and make himself look
like a devil. No, God knows, spite of my age, my figure, and my gravity,
I would disguise myself as a rope-dancer, if, by so doing, I could serve
you. But I still stick to what I say, and--"

"Oh! I know all you would say, my excellent old fellow, and that when
once you have taken an idea into your thick skull, the very devil
himself could no more drive it out of you than he could, by all his
arts, remove the fidelity and devotion implanted in your brave and
valiant heart."

"Come, come, my lord, now you begin to flatter me, I suspect you are up
to some fresh mischief."

"Think no such thing, Murphy; give yourself no uneasiness, but leave all
to me."

"My lord, I cannot be easy; there is some new folly in hand, and I am
sure of it."

"My good friend, you mean well; but you are choosing a very ill hour for
your lectures; forbear, I beg."

"And why, my lord, can you not listen to me now, as well as any other
time?"

"Because you are interfering with one of my short-lived moments of pride
and happiness. I am here, in this dear spot!"

"Where you have done so much good. I know it. Your 'model farm,' as you
term it, built by you to instruct, to encourage, and to reward deserving
labourers, has been of incalculable service to this part of the country.
Ordinary men think but of improving their cattle; you, more wisely and
benevolently, have directed your exertions for the bettering your fellow
creatures. Nothing can be better; and when you placed Madame Georges at
the head of the establishment, you acted with the utmost wisdom and
provident good sense. What a woman she is! No, she is an angel!--so
good, so firm, so noble, and upright! I am not easily moved, my lord, as
you know; but often have I felt my eyes grow moist, as her many trials
and misfortunes rise to my recollection. But about your new protégée,
however, my lord; if you please, we will not say much on that subject.
'The least said is soonest mended,' as the old proverb has it."

"Why not, Murphy?"

"My lord, you will do what you think proper."

"I do what is just," said Rodolph, with an air of impatience.

"What is just, according to your own interpretation."

"What is just before God and my own conscience," replied Rodolph, in a
severe tone.

"Well, my lord, this is a point on which we cannot agree, and therefore
let us speak no more about it."

"I desire you will continue to talk about it!" cried Rodolph,
imperiously.

"I have never been so circumstanced that your royal highness should have
to bid me hold my tongue, and I hope I shall not now be ordered to speak
when I should be silent," said Murphy, proudly.

"Mr. Murphy!" said Rodolph, with a tone of increased irritation.

"My lord!"

"You know, sir, how greatly I detest anything like concealment."

"Your royal highness will excuse me, but it suits me to have certain
concealments," said Murphy, bluntly.

"If I descend to familiarity with you, sir, it is on condition that you,
at least, act with entire frankness towards me."

It is impossible to describe the extreme hauteur which marked the
countenance of Rodolph as he uttered these words.

"I am fifty years of age, I am a gentleman, and your royal highness
should not address me in such a tone."

"Be silent!"

"My lord!"

"Be silent! I say."

"Your royal highness does wrong in compelling a man of honour and
feeling to recall the services he has rendered to you," said the squire,
in a calm tone.

"Have I not repaid those services in a thousand ways?"

It should be stated that Rodolph had not attached to these bitter words
the humiliating sense which could place Murphy in the light of a
mercenary; but such, unfortunately, was the esquire's interpretation of
them. He became purple with shame, lifted his two clenched hands to his
forehead with an expression of deep grief and indignation, and then, in
a moment, as by a sudden revulsion of feeling, throwing his eyes on
Rodolph, whose noble countenance was convulsed by the violence of
extreme disdain, he said, in a faltering voice, and stifling a sigh of
the tenderest pity, "My lord, be yourself; you surpass the bounds of
reason."

These words impelled Rodolph to the very height of irritation; his
glance had even a savage glare in it; his lips were blanched; and,
advancing towards Murphy with a threatening aspect, he exclaimed, "Dare
you?"

Murphy retreated, and said, in a quick tone, and as if in spite of
himself, "My lord, my lord, _remember the thirteenth of January!_"

These words produced a magical effect on Rodolph. His countenance,
contracted by anger, now expanded. He looked at Murphy steadfastly,
bowed his head, and then, after a moment's silence, murmured, in
faltering accents, "Ah, sir, you are now cruel, indeed. I had thought
that my repentance--my deep remorse--and yet it is you--you--"

Rodolph could not finish; his voice was stifled; he sunk, subdued, on a
stone bench, and concealed his countenance with both his hands.

"My lord," said Murphy, in deep distress, "my good lord, forgive me!
Forgive your old and faithful Murphy. It was only when driven to an
extremity, and fearing, alas! not for myself, but for you, the
consequences of your passion, that I uttered those words. I said them in
spite of myself, and with sorrow. My lord, I was wrong to be so
sensitive. _Mon Dieu!_ who can know your character, your feelings, if I
do not,--I, who have never left you from your childhood! Pray, oh, pray
say that you forgive me for having called to your recollection that sad,
sad day. Alas! what expiations have you not made--"

Rodolph raised his head; he was very pale, and said to his companion, in
a gentle and saddened voice, "Enough, enough, my old friend; I thank you
for having, by one word, checked my headlong passion. I make no
apologies to you for the severe things I have said; you know well that
'it is a long way from the heart to the lips,' as the good people at
home say. I was wrong; let us say no more on the subject."

"Alas! now we shall be out of spirits for a long time, as if I were not
sufficiently unhappy! I only wished to see you roused from your low
spirits, and yet I add to them by my foolish tenaciousness. Good Heaven!
what's the use of being an honest man, and having gray hairs, if it does
not enable us to endure reproaches which we do not deserve?"

"Be it so, be it so; we were both in the wrong, my good friend," said
Rodolph, mildly; "let us forget it, and return to our former
conversation. You approved entirely of my establishment of this farm,
and the deep interest I have always felt in Madame Georges. You will
allow, won't you, that she had merited it by her excellent qualities,
her misfortunes, even if she did not belong to the family of
Harville,--a family to which my father had vowed eternal gratitude."

"I have always approved of the sentiments which your lordship has
entertained for Madame Georges."

"But you are astonished at the interest I take in this poor girl, are
you not?"

"Pray, pray, my lord, I was wrong; I was wrong."

"No, I can imagine that appearances have deceived you; but, as you know
my life--all my life, and as you aid me always with as much fidelity as
courage in my self-inflicted expiation, it is my duty, or, if you like
the phrase better, my gratitude, to convince you that I am not acting
from a frivolous impulse."

"Of that I am sure, my lord."

"You know my ideas on the subject of the good which a man ought to do
who has the knowledge, the will, and the power. To succour unhappy, but
deserving, fellow creatures is well; to seek after those who are
struggling against misfortune with energy and honour, and to aid them,
sometimes without their knowledge,--to prevent, in right time, misery
and temptation, is better; to reinstate such perfectly in their own
estimation,---to lead back to honesty those who have preserved in purity
some generous and ennobling sentiments in the midst of the contempt that
withers them, the misery that eats into them, the corruption that
encircles them, and, for that end, to brave, in person, this misery,
this corruption, this contagion, is better still; to pursue, with
unalterable hatred, with implacable vengeance, vice, infamy, and crime,
whether they be trampling in the mud, or be clothed in purple and fine
linen, that is justice; but to give aid inconsiderately to well-merited
degradation, to prostitute and lavish charity and commiseration, by
bestowing help on unworthy and undeserving objects, is most infamous; it
is impiety,--very sacrilege! it is to doubt the existence of the
Almighty; and so, he who acts thus ought to be made to understand."

"My lord, I pray you do not think that I would for a moment assert that
you have bestowed your benefits unworthily."

"One word more, my old friend. You know well that the child whose death
I daily deplore--that that daughter whom I should have loved the more,
as her unworthy mother, Sarah, had shown herself so utterly indifferent
about her--would have been sixteen years of age, like this unhappy girl.
You know, too, that I cannot prevent the deep, and almost painful,
sympathy I feel for young girls of that age."

"True, my lord; and I ought so to have interpreted the interest you
evince for your protégée. Besides, to succour the unfortunate is to
honour God."

"It is, my friend, when the objects deserve it; and thus nothing is more
worthy of compassion and respect than a woman like Madame Georges, who,
brought up by a pious and good mother in the strict observance of all
her duties, has never failed,--never! and has, moreover, courageously
borne herself in the midst of the most severe trials. But is it not to
honour God in the most acceptable way, to raise from the dust one of
those beings of the finest mould, whom he has been pleased to endow
richly? Does not she deserve compassion and respect,--yes,
respect,--who, unhappy girl! abandoned to her own instinct,--who,
tortured, imprisoned, degraded, sullied, has yet preserved, in holiness
and pureness of heart, those noble germs of good first implanted by the
Almighty? If you had but seen, poor child! how, at the first word of
interest expressed for her,--the first mark of kindness and right
feeling,--the most charming natural impulses, the purest tastes, the
most refined thoughts, the most poetic ideas, developed themselves
abundantly in her ingenuous mind, even as, in the early spring, a
thousand wild flowers lift up their heads at the first rays of the sun!
In a conversation of about an hour with Fleur-de-Marie, I have
discovered treasures of goodness, worth, prudence,--yes, prudence, old
Murphy. A smile came to my lips, and a tear in my eye, when, in her
gentle and sensible prattle, she urged on me the necessity of saving
forty sous a day, that I might be beyond want or evil temptations. Poor
little creature! she said all this with so serious and persuasive a
tone. She seemed so delighted to give me good advice, and experienced so
extreme a pleasure in hearing me promise to follow it! I was moved even
to tears; and you,--it affects you, my old friend."

"It does, my lord; the idea of making you lay by forty sous a day,
thinking you a workman, instead of urging you to spend money on her;
that does touch me."

"Hush; here are Madame Georges and Marie. Get all ready for our
departure; we must be in Paris in good time."

Thanks to the care of Madame Georges, Fleur-de-Marie was no longer like
her former self. A pretty peasant's cap, and two thick braids of light
brown hair, encircled her charming face. A large handkerchief of white
muslin crossed her bosom, and disappeared under the high fold of a small
shot taffetas apron, whose blue and red shades appeared to advantage
over a dark nun's dress, which seemed expressly made for her. The young
girl's countenance was calm and composed. Certain feelings of delight
produce in the mind an unspeakable sadness,--a holy melancholy. Rodolph
was not surprised at the gravity of Fleur-de-Marie; he had expected it.
Had she been merry and talkative, she would not have retained so high a
place in his good opinion. In the serious and resigned countenance of
Madame Georges might easily be traced the indelible marks of
long-suffering; but she looked at Fleur-de-Marie with a tenderness and
compassion quite maternal, so much gentleness and sweetness did this
poor girl evince.

"Here is my child, who has come to thank you for your goodness, M.
Rodolph," said Madame Georges, presenting Goualeuse to Rodolph.

At the words, "my child," Goualeuse turned her large eyes slowly towards
her protectress, and contemplated her for some moments with a look of
unutterable gratitude.

"Thanks for Marie, my dear Madame Georges; she deserves this kind
interest, and always will deserve it."

"M. Rodolph," said Goualeuse, with a trembling voice, "you understand, I
know, I feel that you do, that I cannot find anything to say to you."

"Your emotion tells me all, my child."

"Oh, she feels deeply the good fortune that has come to her so
providentially," said Madame Georges, deeply affected; "her first
impulse on entering my room was to prostrate herself before my
crucifix."

"Because now, thanks to you, M. Rodolph, I dare to pray," said
Goualeuse.

Murphy turned away hastily; his pretensions to firmness would not allow
of any one seeing to what extent the simple words of Goualeuse had
touched him.

Rodolph said to her, "My child, I wish to have some conversation with
Madame Georges. My friend Murphy will lead you over the farm, and
introduce you to your future protégés. We will join you presently. Well,
Murphy, Murphy, don't you hear me?"

The worthy gentleman turned his back, and pretended to blow his nose
with a very loud noise, then put his handkerchief in his pocket, pulled
his hat over his eyes, and, turning half around, offered his arm to
Marie, managing so skilfully that neither Rodolph nor Madame Georges
could see his face. Taking the arm of Marie, he walked away with her
towards the farm buildings, and so quickly, that, to keep up with him,
Goualeuse was obliged to run, as in her infant days she ran beside the
Chouette.

"Well, Madame Georges, what do you think of Marie?" inquired Rodolph.

"M. Rodolph, I have told you: she had scarcely entered my room, when,
seeing the crucifix, she fell on her knees before it. It is impossible
for me to tell you, to describe the spontaneous and naturally religious
feeling that evidently dictated this. I saw in an instant that hers was
no degraded soul. And then, M. Rodolph, the expression of her gratitude
to you had nothing exaggerated in it; but it is not the less sincere.
And I have another proof of how natural and potent is this religious
instinct in her. I said to her, 'You must have been much astonished, and
very happy, when M. Rodolph told you that you were to remain here for
the future? What an effect it must have had on you!' 'Yes, oh, yes,' was
her reply; 'when M. Rodolph told me so, I cannot describe what passed
within me; but I felt that kind of holy happiness which I experience in
going into a church. When I could go there,' she added, 'for you know,
madame--' 'I know, my child, for I shall always call you my child (I
could not let her go on when I saw her cover her face for shame), I know
that you have suffered deeply; but God blesses those who love and fear
him, those who have been unhappy, and those who repent.'"

"Then, my good Madame Georges, I am doubly happy at what I have done.
This poor girl will greatly interest you, her disposition is so
excellent, her instincts so right."

"What has besides affected me, M. Rodolph, is that she has not allowed
one single question to escape her about you, although her curiosity
must be so much excited. Struck with a reserve so full of delicacy, I
wished to know what she felt. I said to her, 'You must be very curious
to know who your mysterious benefactor is?' 'Know him!' she replied,
with delightful simplicity; 'he is my benefactor.'"

"Then you will love her. Excellent woman! she will find some interest in
your heart."

"Yes, I shall occupy my heart with her as I should with _him_," said
Madame Georges, in a broken voice.

Rodolph took her hand.

"Do not be discouraged; come, come, if our search has been unsuccessful
so far, yet one day, perhaps--"

Madame Georges shook her head sorrowfully, and said, in bitter accents,
"My poor son would be now twenty years old!"

"Say he is that age--"

"God hear you, and grant it, M. Rodolph."

"He will hear, I fully believe. Yesterday I went (but in vain) to find a
certain fellow called Bras Rouge who might, perhaps, have given me some
information about your son. Coming away from this Bras Rouge's abode,
after a struggle in which I was engaged, I met with this unfortunate
girl--"

"Alas! but your kind endeavour in my behalf has thrown in your way
another unfortunate being, M. Rodolph."

"You have no intelligence from Rochefort?"

"None," said Madame Georges, shuddering, and in a low voice.

"So much the better! We can no longer doubt but that the monster met his
death in the attempt to escape from the--"

Rodolph hesitated to pronounce the horrible word.

"From the Bagne? Oh, say it!--the Bagne!" exclaimed the wretched woman
with horror, and almost frantic as she spoke. "The father of my child!
Ah! if the unhappy boy still lives--if, like me, he has not changed his
name--oh, shame! shame! And yet it may be nothing: his father has,
perhaps, carried out his horrid threat! What has he done with my boy?
Why did he tear him from me?"

"That mystery I cannot fathom," said Rodolph, with a pensive air. "What
could induce the wretch to carry off your son fifteen years ago, and
when he was trying to escape into a foreign land? A child of that age
could only embarrass his flight."

"Alas, M. Rodolph! when my husband" (the poor woman shuddered as she
pronounced the word) "was arrested on the frontier and thrown into
prison, where I was allowed to visit him, he said to me these horrible
words: 'I took away the brat because you were fond of him, and it will
be a means of compelling you to send me money, which may or may not be
of service to him,--that's my affair. Whether he lives or dies it is no
matter to you; but if he lives, he will be in good hands: you shall
drink as deep of the shame of the son as you have of the disgrace of the
father!' Alas! a month afterwards my husband was condemned to the
galleys for life; and since then all my entreaties, my prayers, and
letters have been in vain. I have never been able to learn the fate of
my boy. Ah, M. Rodolph! where is my child at this moment? These
frightful words are always ringing in my ears: 'You shall drink as deep
of the shame of the son as you have of the disgrace of the father!'"

"This atrocity is most inexplicable; why should he demoralise the
unhappy child? Why carry him off?"

"I have told you, M. Rodolph,--to compel me to send him money; although
he had nearly ruined me, yet I had still some small resources, but they
at length were exhausted also. In spite of his wickedness, I could not
believe but that he would employ, at least, a portion of this money in
the bringing-up of this unhappy child."

"And your son had no sign, no mark, by which he could be recognised?"

"No other than that of which I have spoken to you, M. Rodolph,--a small
Saint Esprit, sculptured in lapis lazuli, tied round his neck by a chain
of silver: a sacred relic, blessed by the holy father."

"Courage, courage; God is all-powerful."

"Providence placed me in your path, M. Rodolph."

"Too late, Madame Georges; too late. I might have saved you many years
of sorrow."

"Ah, M. Rodolph, how kind you have been to me!"

"In what way? I bought this farm; in time of your prosperity you were
not idle, and now you have become my manager here, where--thanks to your
excellent superintendence, intelligence, and activity--this
establishment produces me--"

"Produces you, my lord?" said Madame Georges, interrupting Rodolph;
"why, all the returns are employed, not only in ameliorating the
condition of the labourers, who consider the occupation on this model
farm as a great favour, but, moreover, to succour all the needy in the
district; through the mediation of our good Abbé Laporte--"

"Ah, the dear abbé!" said Rodolph, desirous of escaping the praise of
Madame Georges; "have you had the kindness to inform him of my arrival?
I wish to recommend my protégée to him. He has had my letter?"

"Mr. Murphy gave it to him when he came this morning."

"In that letter I told our good curé, in a few words, the history of
this poor girl. I was not sure that I should be able to come to-day
myself, and if not, then Murphy would have conducted Marie--"

A labourer of the farm interrupted this conversation, which had been
carried on in the garden.

"Madame, M. le Curé is waiting for you."

"Are the post-horses arrived, my lad?" inquired Rodolph.

"Yes, M. Rodolph; and they are putting to." And the man left the garden.

Madame Georges, the curé, and the inhabitants of the farm only knew
Fleur-de-Marie's protector as M. Rodolph. Murphy's discretion was
faultless; and although when in private he was very precise in
"my-lording" Rodolph, yet before strangers he was very careful not to
address him otherwise than as _M. Rodolph_.

"I forgot to mention, my dear Madame Georges," said Rodolph, when he
returned to the house, "that Marie has, I fear, very weak
lungs,--privations and misery have tried her health. This morning early
I was struck with the pallor of her countenance, although her cheeks
were of a deep rose colour; her eyes, too, seem to me to have a
brilliancy which betokens a feverish system. Great care must be taken of
her."

"Rely on me, M. Rodolph; but, thank God! there is nothing serious to
apprehend. At her age, in the country, with pure air, rest, and quiet,
she will soon be quite restored."

"I hope so; but I will not trust to your country doctors. I will desire
Murphy to bring here my medical man,--a negro,--a very skilful person,
who will tell you the best regimen to pursue. You must send me news of
Marie very often. Some time hence, when she shall be better, and more at
ease, we will talk about her future life; perhaps it would be best that
she always remained with you, if you were pleased with her."

"I should like it greatly, M. Rodolph; she would supply the place of the
child I have lost, and must for ever bewail."

"Let us still hope for you and for her."

At the moment when Rodolph and Madame Georges approached the farm,
Murphy and Marie also entered. The worthy gentleman let go the arm of
Goualeuse, and said to Rodolph in a low voice, and with an air of some
confusion:

"This girl has bewitched me; I really do not know which interests me
most, she or Madame Georges. I was a brute--a beast!"

"I knew, old Murphy, that you would do justice to my protégée," said
Rodolph, smiling, and shaking hands with the squire.

Madame Georges, leaning on Marie's arm, entered with her into a small
room on the ground floor, where the Abbé Laporte was waiting. Murphy
went away, to see all ready for their departure. Madame Georges, Marie,
Rodolph, and the curé remained together.

Plain, but very comfortable, this small apartment was fitted up with
green hangings, like the rest of the house, as had been exactly
described to Goualeuse by Rodolph. A thick carpet covered the floor, a
good fire burnt in the grate, and two large nosegays of daisies of all
colours, placed in two crystal vases, shed their agreeable odour
throughout the room. Through the windows, with their green blinds, which
were half opened, was to be seen the meadow, the little stream, and,
beyond it, the bank planted with chestnut-trees.

The Abbé Laporte, who was seated near the fireplace, was upwards of
eighty years of age, and had, ever since the last days of the
Revolution, done duty in this small parish. Nothing can be imagined more
venerable than his aged, withered, and somewhat melancholy countenance,
shaded by long white locks, which fell on the collar of his black
cassock, which was pieced in more places than one; the abbé liked
better, as they said, to clothe one or two poor children in good warm
broadcloth, than _faire le muguet_; that is, to wear his cassocks less
than two or three years. The good abbé was so old, so very old, that his
hands trembled continually, and when he occasionally lifted them up,
when speaking, it might have been supposed that he was giving a
benediction.

"M. l'Abbé," said Rodolph, respectfully, "Madame Georges has undertaken
the guardianship of this young girl, for whom I also beg your kindness."

"She is entitled to it, sir, like all who come to us. The mercy of God
is inexhaustible, my dear child, and he has evinced it in not abandoning
you in most severe trials. I know all." And he took the hand of Marie in
his own withered and trembling palms. "The generous man who has saved
you has realised the words of Holy Writ, 'The Lord is near to all those
who call upon him; he will fulfil the desire of those who fear him; he
will hear their cries, and he will save them.' Now deserve his bounty by
your conduct, and you will always find one ready to encourage and
sustain you in the good path on which you have entered. You will have in
Madame Georges a constant example, in me a careful adviser. The Lord
will finish his work."

"And I will pray to him for those who have had compassion on me and have
led me to him, father," said La Goualeuse, throwing herself on her knees
before the priest. Her emotion overcame her; her sobs almost choked her.
Madame Georges, Rodolph, and the abbé were all deeply affected.

"Rise, my dear child," said the curé; "you will soon deserve absolution
from those serious faults of which you have rather been the victim than
the criminal; for, in the words of the prophet, 'The Lord raises up all
those who are ready to fall, and elevates those who are oppressed.'"

Murphy, at this moment, opened the door.

"M. Rodolph," he said, "the horses are ready."

"Adieu, father! adieu, Madame Georges! I commend your child to your
care,--our child, I should say. Farewell, Marie; I will soon come and
see you again."

The venerable pastor, leaning on the arms of Madame Georges and La
Goualeuse, who supported his tottering steps, left the room to see
Rodolph depart.

The last rays of the sun shed their light on this interesting yet sad
group:

An old priest, the symbol of charity, pardon, and everlasting hope; a
female, overwhelmed by every grief that can distress a wife and mother;
a young girl, hardly out of her infancy, and but recently thrown into an
abyss of vice through misery and the close contact with crime.

Rodolph got into the carriage, Murphy took his place by his side, and
the horses set off at speed.




CHAPTER XII.

THE RENDEZVOUS.


The day after he had confided the Goualeuse to the care of Madame
Georges, Rodolph, still dressed as a mechanic, was, at noon precisely,
at the door of a cabaret with the sign of the Panier-Fleuri, not far
from the barrier of Bercy.

The evening before, at ten o'clock, the Chourineur was punctual to the
appointment which Rodolph had fixed with him. The result of this
narrative will inform our readers of the particulars of the meeting. It
was twelve o'clock, and the rain fell in torrents; the Seine, swollen by
perpetual falls of rain, had risen very high, and overflowed a part of
the quay. Rodolph looked from time to time, with a gesture of
impatience, towards the barrier, and at last observed a man and woman,
who were coming towards him under the shelter of an umbrella, and whom
he recognised as the Chouette and the Schoolmaster.

These two individuals were completely metamorphosed. The ruffian had
laid aside his ragged garments and his air of brutal ferocity. He wore a
long frock coat of green cloth, and a round hat; whilst his shirt and
cravat were remarkable for their whiteness. But for the hideousness of
his features and the fierce glance of his eyes, always restless and
suspicious, this fellow might have been taken, by his quiet and steady
step, for an honest citizen.

The Chouette was also in her Sunday costume, wearing a large shawl of
fine wool, with a large pattern, and held in her hand a capacious
basket.

The rain having ceased for the moment, Rodolph, overcoming a sensation
of disgust, went to meet the frightful pair. For the slang of the
_tapis-franc_ the Schoolmaster now substituted a style almost polished,
and which betokened a cultivated mind, in strange contrast with his real
character and crimes. When Rodolph approached, the brigand made him a
polite bow, and the Chouette curtseyed respectfully.

"Sir, your humble servant," said the Schoolmaster. "I am delighted to
pay my respects to you--delighted--or, rather, to renew our
acquaintance; for the night before last you paid me two blows of the
fist which were enough to have felled a rhinoceros. But not a word of
that now; it was a joke on your part, I am sure,--merely done in jest.
Let us not say another word about it, for serious business brings us now
together. I saw the Chourineur yesterday, about eleven o'clock, at the
_tapis-franc_, and appointed to meet him here to-day, in case he chose
to join us,--to be our fellow labourer; but it seems that he most
decidedly refuses."

"You, then, accept the proposal?"

"Your name, sir, if you be so good?"

"Rodolph."

"M. Rodolph, we will go into the Panier-Fleuri,--neither myself nor
madame has breakfasted,--and we will talk over our little matters whilst
we are taking a crust."

"Most willingly."

"We can talk as we go on. You and the Chourineur certainly do owe some
satisfaction to my wife and myself,--you have caused us to lose more
than two thousand francs. Chouette had a meeting near St. Ouen with the
tall gentleman in mourning, who came to ask for you at the
_tapis-franc_. He offered us two thousand francs to do something to you.
The Chourineur has told me all about this. But, Finette," said the
fellow, "go and select a room at the Panier-Fleuri, and order
breakfast,--some cutlets, a piece of veal, a salad, and a couple of
bottles of vin de beaune, the best quality,--and we will join you
there."

The Chouette, who had not taken her eye off Rodolph for a moment, went
off after exchanging looks with the Schoolmaster, who then said:

"I say, M. Rodolph, that the Chourineur has edified me on the subject of
the two thousand francs."

"What do you mean by edified you?"

"You are right,--the language is a little too refined for you. I would
say that the Chourineur nearly told me all that the tall gentleman in
mourning, with his two thousand francs, required."

"Good."

"Not so good, young man; for the Chourineur, having yesterday morning
met the Chouette, near St. Ouen, did not leave her for one moment, when
the tall gentleman in mourning came up, so that he could not approach
and converse with her. You, then, ought to put us in the way of
regaining our two thousand francs."

"Nothing easier; but let us 'hark back.' I had proposed a glorious job
to the Chourineur, which he at first accepted, but afterwards refused to
go on with."

"He always had very peculiar ideas."

"But whilst he refused he observed to me--"

"He made you observe--"

"Oh, _diable_! You are very grand with your grammar."

"It is my profession, as a schoolmaster."

"He made me, then, observe, that if he would not go on this 'lay,' he
did not desire to discourage any other person, and that you would
willingly lend a hand in the affair."

"May I, without impertinence, ask why you appointed a meeting with the
Chourineur at St. Ouen yesterday, which gave him the advantage of
meeting the Chouette? He was too much puzzled at my question to give me
a clear answer."

Rodolph bit his lips imperceptibly, and replied, shrugging his
shoulders:

"Very likely; for I only told him half my plan, you must know, not
knowing if he had made up his mind."

"That was very proper."

"The more so as I had two strings to my bow."

"You are a careful man. You met the Chourineur, then, at St. Ouen,
for--"

Rodolph, after a moment's hesitation, had the good luck to think of a
story which would account for the want of address which the Chourineur
had displayed, and said:

"Why, this it is. The attempt I propose is a famous one, because the
person in question is in the country; all my fear was that he should
return to Paris. To make sure, I went to Pierrefitte, where his
country-house is situated, and there I learned that he would not be back
again until the day after to-morrow."

"Well, but to return to my question; why did you appoint to meet the
Chourineur at St. Ouen?"

"Why, you are not so bright as I took you for. How far is it from
Pierrefitte to St. Ouen?"

"About a league."

"And from St. Ouen to Paris?"

"As much."

"Well, if I had not found any one at Pierrefitte,--that is, if there had
been an empty house there,--why, there also would have been a good job;
not so good as in Paris, but still well worth having. I went back to the
Chourineur, who was waiting for me at St. Ouen. We should have returned
then to Pierrefitte, by a cross-path which I know, and--"

"I understand. If, on the contrary, the job was to be done in Paris?"

"We should have gained the Barrier de l'Étoile by the road of the
Rivolte, and thence to the Allée des Veuves--"

"Is but a step; that is plain enough. At St. Ouen you were well placed
for either operation,--that was clear; and now I can understand why the
Chourineur was at St. Ouen. So the house in the Allée des Veuves will be
uninhabited until the day after to-morrow?"

"Uninhabited, except the porter."

"I see. And is it a profitable job?"

"Sixty thousand francs in gold in the proprietor's cabinet."

"And you know all the ways?"

"Perfectly."

"Silence, here we are; not a word before the vulgar. I do not know if
you feel as I do, but the morning air has given me an appetite."

The Chouette was awaiting them at the door.

"This way; this way," she said. "I have ordered our breakfast."

Rodolph wished the brigand to pass in first, for certain reasons; but
the Schoolmaster insisted on showing so much politeness, that Rodolph
entered before him. Before he sat down, the Schoolmaster tapped lightly
against each of the divisions of the wainscot, that he might ascertain
their thickness and power of transmitting sounds.

"We need not be afraid to speak out," said he; "the division is not
thin. We shall have our breakfast soon, and shall not be disturbed in
our conversation."

A waiter brought in the breakfast, and before he shut the door Rodolph
saw the charcoal-man, Murphy, seated with great composure at a table in
a room close at hand.

The room in which the scene took place that we are describing was long
and narrow, lighted by one window, which looked into the street, and was
opposite to the door. The Chouette turned her back to this window,
whilst the Schoolmaster was at one side of the table, and Rodolph on the
other.

When the servant left the room, the brigand got up, took his plate, and
seated himself beside Rodolph and between him and the door.

"We can talk better," he said, "and need not talk so loud."

"And then you can prevent me from going out," replied Rodolph, calmly.

The Schoolmaster gave a nod in the affirmative, and then, half drawing
out of the pocket of his frock coat a stiletto, round and as thick as a
goose's quill, with a handle of wood which disappeared in the grasp of
his hairy fingers, said:

"You see that?"

"I do."

"Advice to amateurs!" And bringing his shaggy brows together, by a frown
which made his wide and flat forehead closely resemble a tiger's, he
made a significant gesture.

"And you may believe me," added the Chouette, "I have made the tool
sharp."

Rodolph, with perfect coolness, put his hand under his blouse, and took
out a double-barrelled pistol, which he showed to the Schoolmaster, and
then put into his pocket.

"All right; and now we understand each other; but do not misunderstand
me, I am only alluding to an impossibility. If they try to arrest me,
and you have laid any trap for me, I will make 'cold meat' of you."

And he gave a fierce look at Rodolph.

"And I will spring upon him and help you, _fourline_," cried the
Chouette.

Rodolph made no reply, but shrugged his shoulders, and, pouring out a
glass of wine, tossed it off. His coolness deceived the Schoolmaster.

"I only put you on your guard."

"Well, then, put up your 'larding-pin' into your pocket; you have no
chicken to lard now. I am an old cock, and know my game as well as
most," said Rodolph. "But, to our business."

"Yes, let us talk of business; but do not speak against my
'larding-pin;' it makes no noise, and does not disturb anybody."

"And does its work as should be; doesn't it, _fourline_?" added the old
beldam.

"By the way," said Rodolph to the Chouette, "do you really know the
Goualeuse's parents?"

"My man has in his pocket two letters about it, but she shall never see
them,--the little slut! I would rather tear her eyes out with my own
hands. Oh, when I meet her again at the _tapis-franc_, won't I pay her
off--"

"There, that'll do, Finette; we have other things to talk of, and so
leave off your gossip."

"May we 'patter' before the 'mot?'" asked Rodolph.

"Most decidedly! She's true as steel, and is worth her weight in gold to
watch for us, to get information or impressions of keys, to conceal
stolen goods or sell them,--nothing comes amiss to her. She is a
first-rate manager. Good Finette!" added the robber, extending his hand
to the horrid hag. "You can have no idea of the services she has done
me. Take off your shawl, Finette, or you'll be cold when you go out; put
it on the chair with your basket."

The Chouette took off her shawl.

In spite of his presence of mind, and the command which he had over
himself, Rodolph could not quite conceal his surprise when he saw
suspended by a ring of silver, from a thick chain of metal which hung
round the old creature's neck, a small Saint Esprit in lapis lazuli,
precisely resembling that which the son of Madame Georges had round his
neck when he was carried off.

At this discovery, a sudden idea flashed across the mind of Rodolph.
According to the Chourineur's statement, the Schoolmaster had escaped
from the Bagne six months ago, and had since defied all search after him
by disfiguring himself as he had now; and six months ago the husband of
Madame Georges had disappeared from the Bagne. Rodolph surmised that,
very possibly, the Schoolmaster was the husband of that unhappy lady. If
this were so, he knew the fate of the son she lamented,--he possessed,
too, some papers relative to the birth of the Goualeuse. Rodolph had,
then, fresh motives for persevering in his projects, and, fortunately,
his absence of mind was not observed by the Schoolmaster, who was busy
helping the Chouette.

"_Morbleu!_ What a pretty chain you have!" said Rodolph to the one-eyed
woman.

"Pretty, and not dear," answered the old creature, laughing. "It is only
a sham till my man can afford to give me a real one."

"That will depend on this gentleman, Finette. If our job comes off well,
why then--"

"It is astonishing how well it is imitated," continued Rodolph. "And
what is that little blue thing at the end?"

"It is a present from my man, which I shall wear until he gives me a
'ticker.' Isn't it, _fourline_?"

Rodolph's suspicions were thus half confirmed, and he waited with
anxiety for the reply of the Schoolmaster, who said:

"You must take care of that, notwithstanding the 'ticker,' Finette; it
is a talisman, and brings good luck."

"A talisman!" said Rodolph, in a careless tone; "do you believe in
talismans? And where the devil did you pick it up? Give me the address
of the shop."

"They do not make them now; the shop is shut up. As you see it, that bit
of jewelry has a very great antiquity,--three generations. I value it
highly, for it is a family loom," added he, with a hideous grin; "and
that's why I gave it to Finette, that she might have good fortune in the
enterprises in which she so skilfully seconds me. Only see her at work!
only see her! If we go into 'business' together, why--But let us now to
our affair in hand. You say that in the Allée des Veuves--"

"At No. 17 there is a house inhabited by a rich man, whose name is--"

"I will not be guilty of the indiscretion of asking his name. You say
there are sixty thousand francs in gold in a cabinet?"

"Sixty thousand francs in gold!" exclaimed the Chouette.

Rodolph nodded his head in the affirmative.

"And you know this house, and the people in it?" said the Schoolmaster.

"Quite well."

"Is the entry difficult?"

"A wall seven feet high on the side of the Allée des Veuves, a garden,
windows down to the ground, and the house has only the ground floor
throughout."

"And there is only the porter to guard this treasure?"

"Yes."

"And what, young man, is your proposed plan of proceeding?"

"Simple enough: to climb over the wall, pick the lock of the door, or
force open a shutter or lock. What do you think of it?"

"I cannot answer you before I have examined it all myself,--that is, by
the aid of my wife; but, if all you tell me is as you say, I think it
would be the thing to do it at once this evening."

And the ruffian looked earnestly at Rodolph.

"This evening!--impossible!" replied he.

"Why, since the occupier does not return until the day after
to-morrow?"

"Yes, but I--I cannot this evening--"

"Really? Well, and I--I cannot to-morrow."

"Why not?"

"For the reason that prevents you this evening," said the robber, in a
tone of mockery.

After a moment's reflection, Rodolph replied:

"Well, then, this evening be it. Where shall we meet?"

"We will not separate," said the Schoolmaster.

"Why not?"

"Why should we?"

"What is the use of separating? The weather has cleared up, and we will
go and walk about, and give a look at the Allée des Veuves; you will see
how my woman will work. When that is done, we will return and play a
hand at piquet, and have a bit of something in a place in the Champs
Elysées that I know, near the river; and, as the Allée des Veuves is
deserted at an early hour, we will walk that way about ten o'clock."

"I will join you at nine o'clock."

"Do you or do you not wish that we should do this job together?"

"I do wish it."

"Well, then, we do not separate before evening, or else--"

"Or else?"

"I shall think that you are making 'a plant' for me, and that's the
reason you wish to part company now."

"If I wished to set the 'traps' after you, what is to prevent my doing
so this evening?"

"Why, everything. You did not expect that I should propose the affair to
you so soon, and if you do not leave us you cannot put anybody up to
it."

"You mistrust me, then?"

"Most extremely. But as what you propose may be quite true and honest,
and the half of sixty thousand francs is worth a risk, I am willing to
try for it; but this evening, or never; if never, I shall have my
suspicions of you confirmed, and one day or other I will take care and
let you dine off a dish of my cooking."

"And I will return your compliment, rely on it."

"Oh, this is all stuff and nonsense!" said the Chouette. "I think with
_fourline_, to-night or never."

Rodolph was in a state of extreme anxiety; if he allowed this
opportunity to escape of laying hands on the Schoolmaster, he might
never again light on him. The ruffian would ever afterwards be on his
guard, or if recognised, apprehended, and taken back to the Bagne, would
carry with him that secret which Rodolph had so much interest in
discovering. Confiding in his address and courage, and trusting to
chance, he said to the Schoolmaster:

"Agreed, then; and we will not part company before evening."

"Then I'm your man. It is now two o'clock; it is some distance from here
to the Allée des Veuves; it is raining again in torrents; let us pay the
reckoning and take a coach."

"If we have a coach, I should like first to smoke a cigar."

"Why not?" said the Schoolmaster. "Finette does not mind the smell of
tobacco."

"Well, then, I'll go and fetch some cigars," said Rodolph, rising.

"Pray don't give yourself that trouble," said the Schoolmaster, stopping
him; "Finette will go."

Rodolph resumed his seat. The Schoolmaster had penetrated his design.
The Chouette went out.

"What a clever manager I have, haven't I?" said the ruffian; "and so
tractable, she would throw herself into the fire for me."

"Apropos of fire, it is not overwarm here," replied Rodolph, placing
both his hands under his blouse; and then, continuing his conversation
with the Schoolmaster, he took out a lead-pencil and a morsel of paper,
which he had in his waistcoat pocket, without being detected, and wrote
some words hastily, taking care to make his letters wide apart, so that
they might be more legible; for he wrote under his blouse, and without
seeing what he wrote.

This note escaped the penetration of the Schoolmaster; the next thing
was to enable it to reach its address.

Rodolph rose and went listlessly towards the window, and began to hum a
tune between his teeth, accompanying himself on the window glasses.

The Schoolmaster came up to the window and said to Rodolph:

"What tune are you playing?"

"I am playing '_Tu n'auras pas ma rose._'"

"And a very pretty tune it is. I should like to know if it would have
the effect of making any of the passers-by turn round?"

"I had no such intention."

"You are wrong, young man; for you are playing the tambourine on that
pane of glass with all your might. But I was thinking, the porter of
this house in the Allée des Veuves is perhaps a stout fellow; if he
resists, you have only your pistol, which is a noisy weapon, whilst a
tool like this (and he showed Rodolph the handle of his poniard) makes
no noise, and does not disturb anybody."

"Do you mean, then, to assassinate him?" exclaimed Rodolph. "If you have
any such intention, let us give up the job altogether; I will have no
hand in it,--so don't rely on me--"

"But if he wakes?"

"We will take to our heels."

"Well, just as you like; only it is better to come to a clear
understanding beforehand. So, then, ours is simply a mere robbery with
forcible entry--"

"Nothing more."

"That's very silly and contemptible; but so be it."

"And as I will not leave you for a second," thought Rodolph, "I will
prevent you from shedding blood."




CHAPTER XIII.

PREPARATIONS.


The Chouette returned to the room, bringing the cigars with her.

"I don't think it rains now," said Rodolph, lighting his cigar. "Suppose
we go and fetch the coach ourselves,--it will stretch our legs."

"What! not rain!" replied the Schoolmaster; "are you blind? Do you think
I will expose Finette to the chance of catching cold, and exposing her
precious life, and spoiling her new shawl?"

"You are right, old fellow; it rains cats and dogs. Let the servant come
and we can pay him, and desire him to fetch us a coach," replied
Rodolph.

"That's the most sensible thing you have said yet, young fellow; we may
go and look about as we seek the Allée des Veuves."

The servant entered, and Rodolph gave her five francs.

"Ah, sir, it is really an imposition,--I cannot allow it," exclaimed the
Schoolmaster.

"Oh, all right; your turn next time."

"Be it so, but on condition that I shall offer you something, by and by,
in a little cabaret in the Champs Elysées,--a capital little snuggery
that I know of."

"Just as you like."

The servant paid, and they left the room.

Rodolph wished to go last, out of politeness to the Chouette, but the
Schoolmaster would not allow it, and followed close on his heels,
watching his every movement.

The master of the house kept a wine-shop also, and amongst other
drinkers, a charcoal-man, with his face blackened and his large hat
flapping over his eyes, was paying his "shot" at the bar when these
three personages appeared. In spite of the close lookout of the
Schoolmaster and the one-eyed hag, Rodolph, who walked before the
hideous pair, exchanged a rapid and unperceived glance with Murphy as he
got into the hackney-coach.

"Which way am I to go, master?" asked the driver.

Rodolph replied, in a loud voice:

"Allée des--"

"Des Acacias, in the Bois de Boulogne," cried the Schoolmaster,
interrupting him. Then he added, "And we will pay you well, coachman."

The door was shut.

"What the devil made you bawl out which way we were going before these
people?" said the Schoolmaster. "If the thing were found out to-morrow,
we might be traced and discovered. Young man,--young man, you are very
imprudent!"

The coach was already in motion. Rodolph answered:

"True; I did not think of that. But with my cigar I shall smoke you like
herrings; let us have a window open."

And, joining the action to the words, Rodolph, with much dexterity, let
fall outside the window the morsel of paper, folded very small, on which
he had hastily written a few words in pencil under his blouse. The
Schoolmaster's glance was so quick, that, in spite of the calmness of
Rodolph's features, the ruffian detected some expression of triumph,
for, putting his head out of the window, he called out to the driver:

"Whip behind! whip behind! there is some one getting up at the back of
the coach!"

The coach stopped, and the driver, standing on his seat, looked back,
and said:

"No, master, there is no one there."

"_Parbleu!_ I will look myself," replied the Schoolmaster, jumping out
into the street.

Not seeing any person or anything (for since Rodolph had dropped the
paper the coach had gone on several yards), the Schoolmaster thought he
was mistaken.

"You will laugh at me," he said, as he resumed his seat, "but I don't
know why I thought some one was following us."

The coach at this moment turned round a corner, and Murphy, who had not
lost sight of it with his eyes, and had seen Rodolph's manoeuvre, ran
and picked up the little note, which had fallen into a crevice between
two of the paving-stones.

At the end of a quarter of an hour the Schoolmaster said to the driver
of the hackney-coach:

"My man, we have changed our minds; drive to the Place de la Madelaine."

Rodolph looked at him with astonishment.

"All right, young man; from hence we may go to a thousand different
places. If they seek to track us hereafter, the deposition of the
coachman will not be of the slightest service to them."

At the moment when the coach was approaching the barrier, a tall man,
clothed in a long white riding-coat, with his hat drawn over his eyes,
and whose complexion appeared of a deep brown, passed rapidly along the
road, stooping over the neck of a high, splendid hunter, which trotted
with extraordinary speed.

"A good horse and a good rider," said Rodolph, leaning forward to the
door of the coach and following Murphy (for it was he) with his eyes.
"What a pace that stout man goes! Did you see him?"

"_Ma foi!_ he passed so very quickly," said the Schoolmaster, "that I
did not remark him."

Rodolph calmly concealed his satisfaction; Murphy had, doubtless,
deciphered the almost hieroglyphic characters of the note which he had
dropped, and which had escaped the vigilance of the Schoolmaster.
Certain that the coach was not followed, he had become more assured, and
desirous of imitating the Chouette, who slept, or rather pretended to
sleep, he said to Rodolph:

"Excuse me, young man, but the motion of the coach always produces a
singular effect on me,--it sends me off to sleep like a child."

The ruffian, under the guise of assumed sleep, thought to examine
whether the physiognomy of his companion betrayed any emotion; but
Rodolph was on his guard, and replied:

"I rose so early that I feel sleepy, and will have a nap, too."

He shut his eyes, and very soon the hard breathing of the Schoolmaster
and the Chouette, who snored in chorus, so completely deceived Rodolph,
that, thinking his companions sound asleep, he half opened his eyes. The
Schoolmaster and the Chouette, in spite of their loud snoring, had their
eyes open, and were exchanging some mysterious signs by means of their
fingers curiously placed or bent in the palms of their hands. In an
instant this mute language ceased. The brigand no doubt perceived, by
some almost imperceptible sign, that Rodolph was not asleep, and said,
in a laughing tone:

"Ah, ah, comrade! what, you were trying your friends, were you?"

"That can't astonish you, who sleep with your eyes open."

"I, who--That's different, young man; I am a somnambulist."

The hackney-coach stopped in the Place de la Madelaine. The rain had
ceased for a moment, but the clouds, driven by the violence of the wind,
were so dark and so low, that it was almost night in appearance.
Rodolph, the Chouette, and the Schoolmaster went towards the Cours la
Reine.

"Young man, I have an idea, which is not a bad one," said the robber.

"What is it?"

"To ascertain if all that you have told us respecting the interior of
the house in the Allée des Veuves is true."

"You surely will not go there now, under any circumstances? It would
awaken suspicion."

"I am not such a flat as that, young fellow; but why have I a wife whose
name is Finette?"

The Chouette drew up her head.

"Do you see her, young man? Why, she looks like a war-horse when he
hears the blast of the trumpet!"

"You mean to send her as a lookout?"

"Precisely so."

"No. 17, Allée des Veuves, isn't it, my man?" cried the Chouette,
impatiently. "Make yourself easy: I have but one eye, but that is a good
one."

"Do you see, young man,--do you see she is all impatience to be at
work?"

"If she manages cleverly to get into the house, I do not think your idea
a bad one."

"Take the umbrella, _fourline_; in half an hour I will be here again,
and you shall see what I will do," said the Chouette.

"One moment, Finette; we are going down to the Bleeding Heart,--only two
steps from here. If the little Tortillard (cripple) is there, you had
better take him with you; he will remain outside on the watch whilst you
go inside the house."

"You are right,--little Tortillard is as cunning as a fox; he is not ten
years of age, and yet it was he who the other day--"

A signal from the Schoolmaster interrupted the Chouette.

"What does the 'Bleeding Heart' mean? It is an odd sign for a cabaret,"
asked Rodolph.

"You must complain to the landlord."

"What is his name?"

"The landlord of the Bleeding Heart?"

"Yes."

"What is that to you? He never asks the names of his customers."

"But, still--"

"Call him what you like,--Peter, Thomas, Christopher, or Barnabas,--he
will answer to any and all. But here we are, and it's time we were, for
the rain is coming down again in floods; and how the river roars! It has
almost become a torrent! Why, look at it! Two more days of such rain,
and the water will overflow the arches of the bridge."

"You say that we are _there_, but where the devil is the cabaret? I do
not see any house here."

"Certainly not, if you look round about you."

"Where should I look, then?"

"At your feet."

"At my feet?"

"Yes."

"And whereabouts?"

"Here,--look; do you see the roof? Mind, and don't step upon it."

Rodolph had not remarked one of those subterraneans which used to be
seen, some years since, in certain spots in the Champs Elysées, and
particularly near the Cours la Reine.

A flight of steps, cut out of the damp and greasy ground, led to the
bottom of this sort of deep ditch, against one end of which, cut
perpendicularly, leaned a low, mean, dilapidated hovel; its roof,
covered with moss-covered tiles, was scarcely so high as the ground on
which Rodolph was standing; two or three out-buildings, constructed of
worm-eaten planks, serving as cellar, wood-house, and rabbit-hutches,
surrounded this wretched den.

A narrow path, which extended along this ditch, led from the stairs to
the door of the hut; the rest of the ground was concealed under a mass
of trellis-work, which sheltered two rows of clumsy tables, fastened to
the ground. A worn-out iron sign swung heavily backwards and forwards on
its creaking hinges, and through the rust that covered it might still be
seen a red heart pierced with an arrow. The sign was supported by a post
erected above this cave,--this real human burrow.

A thick and moist fog was added to the rain as night approached.

"What think you of this hôtel, young fellow?" inquired the Schoolmaster.

"Why, thanks to the torrents that have fallen for the last fortnight, it
must be deliciously fresh. But come on."

"One moment,--I wish to know if the landlord is in. Hark!"

The ruffian then, thrusting his tongue forcibly against his palate,
produced a singular noise,--a sort of guttural sound, loud and
lengthened, something like P-r-r-r-r-r-r-r!!! A similar note came from
the depths of the hovel.

"He's there," said the Schoolmaster. "Pardon me, young man,--respect to
the ladies,--allow the Chouette to pass first; I follow you. Mind how
you come,--it's slippery."




CHAPTER XIV.

THE BLEEDING HEART.


The landlord of the Bleeding Heart, after having responded to the signal
of the Schoolmaster, advanced politely to the threshold of his door.

This personage, whom Rodolph had been to see in the Cité, and whom he
did not yet know under his true name, or, rather, his habitual surname,
was Bras Rouge.

Lank, mean-looking, and feeble, this man might be fifty years of age.
His countenance resembled both the weasel and the rat; his peaked nose,
his receding chin, his high cheek-bones, his small eyes, black,
restless, and keen, gave his features an indescribable expression of
malice, cunning, and sagacity. An old brown wig, or, rather, as yellow
as his bilious complexion, perched on the top of his head, showed the
nape of the old fellow's withered neck. He had on a round jacket, and
one of those long black aprons worn by the waiters at the wine shops.

Our three acquaintances had hardly descended the last step of the
staircase when a child of about ten years of age, rickety, lame, and
somewhat misshapen, came to rejoin Bras Rouge, whom he resembled in so
striking a manner that there was no mistaking them for father and son.
There was the same quick and cunning look, joined to that impudent,
hardened, and knavish air, which is peculiar to the scamp (_voyou_) of
Paris,--that fearful type of precocious depravity, that real 'hemp-seed'
(_graine de bagne_), as they style it, in the horrible slang of the
gaol. The forehead of the brat was half lost beneath a thatch of
yellowish locks, as harsh and stiff as horse-hair. Reddish-coloured
trousers and a gray blouse, confined by a leather girdle, completed
Tortillard's costume, whose nickname was derived from his infirmity. He
stood close to his father, standing on his sound leg like a heron by the
side of a marsh.

"Ah, here is the darling one (_môme_)!" said the Schoolmaster. "Finette,
night is coming on, and time is pressing; we must profit by the daylight
which is left to us."

"You are right, my man; I will ask the father to spare his darling."

"Good day, old friend," said Bras Rouge, addressing the Schoolmaster, in
a voice which was cracked, sharp, and shrill. "What can I do for you?"

"Why, if you could spare your 'small boy' to my mistress for a quarter
of an hour, she has lost something which he could help her to look for."

Bras Rouge winked his eye and made a sign to the Schoolmaster, and then
said to the child:

"Tortillard, go with madame."

The hideous brat hopped forward and took hold of the "one-eyed's" hand.

"Love of a bright boy, come along! There is a child!" said Finette. "And
how like his father! He is not like Pegriotte, who always pretended to
have a pain in her side when she came near me,--a little baggage!"

"Come, come away!--be off, Finette! Keep your weather-eye open, and
bright lookout. I await you here."

"I won't be long. Go first, Tortillard."

The one-eyed hag and the little cripple went up the slippery steps.

"Finette, take the umbrella," the brigand called out.

[Illustration: "'_Ah, Here is the 'Darling One'!_'"
Original Etching by Adrian Marcel]

"It would be in the way, my man," said the old woman, who quickly
disappeared with Tortillard in the midst of the fog, which thickened
with the twilight, and the hollow murmur of the wind as it moaned
through the thick and leafless branches of the tall elms in the Champs
Elysées.

"Let us go in," said Rodolph.

It was requisite to stoop in passing in at the door of the cabaret,
which was divided into two apartments. In one was a bar and a
broken-down billiard-table; in the other, tables and garden chairs,
which had once been painted green. Two narrow windows, with their
cracked panes festooned with spiders' webs, cast a dim but not religious
light on the damp walls.

Rodolph was alone for one moment only, during which Bras Rouge and the
Schoolmaster had time to exchange some words, rapidly uttered, and some
mysterious signs.

"You'll take a glass of beer,--or brandy, perhaps,--whilst we wait for
Finette?" said the Schoolmaster.

"No; I am not thirsty."

"Do as you like,--I am for a 'drain' of brandy," said the ruffian; and
he seated himself on one of the little green tables in the second
apartment.

Darkness came on to this den so completely, that it was impossible to
see in one of the angles of this inner apartment the open mouth of one
of those cellars which are entered by a door in two divisions, one of
which was constantly kept open for the convenience of access. The table
at which the Schoolmaster sat was close upon this dark and deep hole,
and he turned his back upon it, so that it was entirely concealed from
Rodolph's view.

He was looking through the window, in order to command his countenance
and conceal the workings of his thoughts. The sight of Murphy speeding
through the Allée des Veuves did not quite assure him; he was afraid
that the worthy squire had not quite understood the full meaning of his
note, necessarily so laconic, and containing only these words:

"This evening--ten o'clock. Be on your guard."

Resolved not to go to the Allée des Veuves before that moment, nor to
lose sight of the Schoolmaster for an instant, he yet trembled at the
idea of losing the only opportunity that might ever be afforded him of
obtaining that secret which he was so excessively anxious to possess.
Although he was powerful and well armed, yet he had to deal with an
unscrupulous assassin, capable of any and every thing. Not desiring,
however, that his thoughts should be detected, he seated himself at the
table with the Schoolmaster, and, by way of seeming at his ease, called
for a glass of something. Bras Rouge having exchanged a few words, in a
low tone, with the brigand, looked at Rodolph with an air in which
curiosity, distrust, and contempt were mingled.

"It is my advice, young man," said the Schoolmaster, "that if my wife
informs us that the persons we wish to see are within, we had better
make our call about eight o'clock."

"That will be two hours too soon," said Rodolph; "and that will spoil
all."

"Do you think so?"

"I am sure of it."

"Bah! amongst friends there should be no ceremony."

"I know them well, and I tell you that we must not think of going before
ten o'clock."

"Are you out of your senses, young man?"

"I give you my opinion, and devil fetch me if I stir from here before
ten o'clock."

"Don't disturb yourself,--I never close my establishment before
midnight," said Bras Rouge, in his falsetto voice; "it is the time when
my best customers drop in; and my neighbours never complain of the noise
which is made in my house."

"I must agree to all you wish, young man," continued the Schoolmaster.
"Be it so, then; we will not set out on our visit until ten o'clock."

"Here is the Chouette!" said Bras Rouge, hearing and replying to a
warning cry similar to that which the Schoolmaster had uttered before he
descended to the subterraneous abode.

A minute afterwards the Chouette entered the billiard-room alone.

"It is all right, my man,--I've done the trick!" cried the one-eyed hag,
as she entered.

Bras Rouge discreetly withdrew, without asking a word about Tortillard,
whom, perhaps, he did not expect to see return. The beldam sat with her
face towards Rodolph and the brigand.

"Well?" said the Schoolmaster.

"The young fellow has told us all true, so far."

"Ah! you see I was right," exclaimed Rodolph.

"Let the Chouette tell her tale, young man. Come, tell us all about it,
Finette."

"I went straight to No. 17, leaving Tortillard on the lookout and
concealed in a corner. It was still daylight, and I rung at a side door
which opens outwards, and here's about two inches of space between it
and the sill; nothing else to notice. I rang; the porter opened. Before
I pulled the bell I had put my bonnet in my pocket, that I might look
like a neighbour. As soon as I saw the porter I pretended to cry
violently, saying that I had lost a pet parrot, Cocotte,--a little
darling that I adored. I told him I lived in the Rue Marboeuf, and that
I had pursued Cocotte from garden to garden, and entreated him to allow
me to enter and try and find the bird."

"Ah!" said the Schoolmaster, with an air of proud satisfaction, pointing
to Finette, "what a woman!"

"Very clever," said Rodolph. "And what then?"

"The porter allowed me to look for the creature, and I went trotting all
around the garden, calling 'Cocotte! Cocotte!' and looked about me in
every direction to scrutinise every thing. Inside the walls," continued
the horrid old hag, going on with her description of the premises,
"inside the walls, trellis-work all around,--a perfect staircase; at the
left-hand corner of the wall a fir-tree, just like a ladder,--a lying-in
woman might descend by it. The house has six windows on the ground
floor, and has no upper story,--six small windows without any fastening.
The windows of the ground floor close with shutters, having hooks below
and staples in the upper part: press in the bottom, use your steel
file--"

"A push," said the Schoolmaster, "and it is open."

The Chouette continued:

"The entrance has a glass door, two Venetian blinds outside--"

"Memorandum," said the ruffian.

"Quite correct; it is as precise as if we saw it," said Rodolph.

"On the left," resumed the Chouette, "near the courtyard, is a well; the
rope may be useful (for at that particular spot there is no trellis
against the wall), in case retreat should be cut off in the direction of
the door. On entering into the house--"

"You got inside the house, then? Young man, she got inside the house!"
said the Schoolmaster, with pride.

"To be sure I got in! Not finding Cocotte, I had made so much
lamentation that I pretended I was quite out of breath; I begged the
porter to allow me to sit down on the step of the door, and he very
kindly asked me to step in, offering me a glass of wine and water. 'A
glass of plain water,' I said; 'plain water only, my good sir.' Then he
made me go into the antechamber,--carpeted all over; good
precaution,--footsteps or broken glass cannot be heard, if we must 'mill
the glaze' (break a pane of glass); right and left, doors with sliding
bolts, which open by a gentle push from the top. At the bottom was a
strong door, locked,--it looked very like a money-chest. I had my wax in
my basket--"

"She had her wax, young man! She never goes without her wax!" said the
brigand.

The Chouette proceeded:

"It was necessary to approach the door which smelled so strongly of the
cash, so I pretended that I was seized with a fit of coughing,--so
violent, that I was compelled to lean against the wall for support.
Hearing me cough, the porter said,'I'll fetch you a morsel of sugar to
put in your water.' He probably looked for a spoon, for I heard plate
chink,--plate in the room on the left-hand; don't forget that,
_fourline_. Well, coughing and wheezing, I reached the door at the
bottom,--I had my wax in the palm of my hand. I leaned against the lock
as though accidentally, and here is the impression; we may not want it
to-day, but another time it may be useful."

And the Chouette gave the brigand a bit of yellow wax, on which the
print of the lock was perfectly impressed.

"You can tell us whether this is the door of the money-chest," said the
Chouette.

"It is, and there is the cash," replied Rodolph; and then said to
himself, "Has Murphy, then, been the dupe of this cursed old hag?
Perhaps so, and he only expects to be assailed at ten o'clock; by that
time every precaution will have been taken."

"But all the money is not there," continued the Chouette, and her one
green eye sparkled. "As I approached the windows, still searching for my
darling Cocotte, I saw in one of the chambers (door on the left) some
bags of crown pieces, in a bureau. I saw them as plainly as I see you,
my man; there were at least a dozen of them."

"Where is Tortillard?" said the Schoolmaster.

"In his hiding-place,--not more than two paces from the garden. He can
see in the dark like a cat. There is only that one entrance to No. 17,
so when we go he will tell us if any one has come or not."

"That's good--"

The Schoolmaster had scarcely uttered these words than he made a sudden
rush at Rodolph, grappled him by the throat, and flung him violently
down the cellar which was yawning behind the table.

The attack was so rapid, unexpected, and powerful, that Rodolph could
neither foresee nor avoid it. The Chouette, alarmed, uttered a piercing
shriek; for at the first moment she had not seen the result of the
struggle. When the noise of Rodolph's body rolling down the steps had
ceased, the Schoolmaster, who knew all the ways and windings of the
underground vaults in the place, went down the stairs slowly, listening
as he went.

"_Fourline_, be on your guard," cried the beldam, leaning over the
opening of the trap; "draw your 'pinking iron.'"

The brigand disappeared without any reply. For a time nothing was heard,
but at the end of a few moments the distant noise of a door shutting,
which creaked on its rusty hinges, sounded harshly in the depths of the
cavern; then all was again still as death. The darkness was complete.
The Chouette fumbled in her basket, and then, producing a lucifer-match,
lighted a wax taper, whose feeble ray made visible the darkness of this
dreary den.

At this moment the monster-visage of the Schoolmaster appeared at the
opening of the trap. The Chouette could not repress an exclamation of
horror at the sight of his ghastly, seamed, mutilated, and fearful face,
with eyes that gleamed like phosphorus, and seemed to glare on the
ground even in the midst of the darkness which the lighted taper could
not entirely dissipate. Having subdued her feeling of fright, the old
hag exclaimed, in a tone of horrible flattery:

"You must be an awful man, _fourline_, for even I was frightened!--yes,
I!"

"Quick, quick, for the Allée des Veuves!" said the ruffian, securely
closing the double flap of the trap with a bar of iron. "In another
hour, perhaps, it will be too late. If it is a trap, it is not yet
baited; if it is not, why, we can do the job alone."




CHAPTER XV.

THE VAULT.


Stunned by his horrible fall, Rodolph lay senseless and motionless at
the bottom of the stairs, down which he had been hurled. The
Schoolmaster, dragging him to the entrance of a second and still deeper
cavern, thrust him into its hideous recesses, and closing and securely
bolting a massy iron-shod door, returned to his worthy confederate, the
Chouette, who was waiting to join him in the proposed robbery (it might
be murder) in the Allée des Veuves.

About the end of an hour Rodolph began, though slowly, to resume his
consciousness. He found himself extended on the ground, in the midst of
thick darkness; he extended his hand and touched the stone stairs
descending to the vault; a sensation of extreme cold about his feet
induced him to endeavour, by feeling the ground, to ascertain the cause:
his fingers dabbled in a pool of water.

With a violent effort he contrived to seat himself on the lower step of
the staircase; the giddiness arising from his fall subsided by degrees,
and as he became able to extend his limbs he found, to his great joy,
that, though severely shaken and contused, no bones were broken. He
listened: the only sound that reached his ear was a low, dull,
pattering, but continued noise, of which he was then far from divining
the cause.

As his senses became more clear, so did the circumstances, to which he
had been the unfortunate victim, return to his imagination; and just as
he had recalled each particular, and was deeply considering the possible
result of the whole, he became aware that his feet were wholly submerged
in water; it had, indeed, risen above his ankle.

In the midst of the heavy gloom and deep silence which surrounded him,
he heard still the same dull, trickling sound he had observed before;
and now the matter was clear to him. Now, indeed, he comprehended all
the horrors of his situation: the cave was filling with water, arising
from the fearful and formidable overflowing of the Seine,--the dungeon
in which he had been thrown was doubtless beneath the level of the
river, and was chosen by his gaolers for that purpose, as offering a
slow though certain means of destruction.

The conviction of his danger recalled Rodolph entirely to himself. Quick
as lightning he made his way up the damp, slippery stairs; arrived at
the top, he came in contact with a thick door; he tried in vain to open
it,--its massy hinges resisted his most vigorous efforts to force them.

At this moment of despair and danger, his first thought was for Murphy.
"If he be not on his guard, those monsters will murder him!" cried he.
"It will be I who shall have caused his death,--my good, my faithful
Murphy!" This cruel thought nerved the arm of Rodolph with fresh vigour,
and again he bent his most powerful energy to endeavour to force the
ponderous door. Alas! the thickly plated iron with which it was covered
mocked his utmost efforts; and sore, weary, and exhausted, he was
compelled to relinquish the fruitless task. Again he descended into the
cave, in hopes of obtaining something which might serve as a lever to
force the hinges or wrench the fastenings. Groping against the slimy
walls, he felt himself continually treading on some sort of round
elastic bodies, which appeared to slip from under his feet, and to
scramble for safety past him. They were rats, driven by the fast-rising
water from their retreats. Groping about the place on all fours, with
the water half way up his leg, Rodolph felt in all directions for the
weapon he so much desired to find; nothing but the damp walls met his
touch, however, and, in utter despair, he resumed his position at the
top of the steps,--of the thirteen stairs which composed the flight,
three were already under water.

Thirteen had ever been Rodolph's unlucky number. There are moments when
the strongest minds are under the influence of superstitious ideas, and,
at this juncture, Rodolph viewed the fatal amount of stairs as an ill
augury. Again the possible fate of Murphy recurred to him, and, as if
inspired by a fresh hope, he eagerly felt around the door to discover
some slight chink, or opening, by which his cries for help might be
heard. In vain; the dampness of the soil had swollen the wood, and
joined it hermetically to the wet, slimy earth.

Rodolph next tried the powers of his voice, and shouted with the fullest
expansion of his lungs, trusting that his cries for assistance might
reach the adjoining cabaret; and then, tired and exhausted, sat down to
listen. Nothing was to be heard, no sound disturbed the deep silence
which reigned, but the drop, drop, drop, the dull, trickling, monotonous
bubbling of the fast-increasing waters.

His last hope extinguished, Rodolph seated himself in gloomy despair,
and, leaning his back against the door, bewailed the perilous situation
of his faithful friend,--perhaps at that very moment struggling beneath
the assassin's knife. Bitterly did he then regret his rash and
venturesome projects, however good and generous the motives by which he
had been instigated; and severely did he reproach himself for having
taken advantage of the devotion of Murphy, who, rich, honoured, and
esteemed by all who knew him, had quitted a beloved wife and child, to
assist Rodolph in the bold undertaking he had imposed on himself.

During these sorrowful reflections, the water was still rising rapidly,
and five steps only now remained dry. Rodolph now found himself
compelled to assume a standing position, though, in so doing, his
forehead was brought in close contact with the very top of the vault. He
calculated the probable duration of his mortal agony,--of the period
which must elapse ere this slow, inch-like death would put a period to
his misery; he bethought him of the pistol he carried with him, and, at
the risk of injuring himself in the attempt, he determined to fire it
off against the door, so as to disturb some of the fastenings by the
concussion; but here, again, a disappointment awaited him,--the pistol
was nowhere to be found, and he could but conclude it had fallen from
his pocket during his struggle with the Schoolmaster. But for his deep
concern on Murphy's account, Rodolph would have met his death
unmoved,--his conscience acquitted him of all intentional offence; nay,
it solaced him with the recollection of good actually performed, and
much more meditated. To the decrees of an all-wise and inscrutable
Providence he resigned himself, and humbly accepted his present
punishment as the just reward for a criminal action as yet unexpiated.

A fresh trial of his fortitude awaited him. The rats, still pursued by
the fast-gathering waters, finding no other means of escape, sought
refuge from one step to another, ascending as fast as the rising flood
rendered their position untenable; unable to scale the perpendicular
walls or doors, they availed themselves of the vestments of Rodolph,
whose horror and disgust rose to an indescribable degree, as he felt
their cold, clammy paws, and wet, hairy bodies, crawling or clinging to
him; in his attempts to repulse them, their sharp, cold bite inflicted
on him a most acute agony, while his face and hands streamed with blood,
from the multitude of wounds received. Again he called for help, shouted
aloud, and almost screamed in his pain and wretchedness. Alas! the dull
echo of the vault and the gurgling waters alone replied. A few short
moments, and he would be bereft even of the power of calling upon God or
man to help him; the rapidly rising flood had now reached his very
throat, and ere long would have ascended to his lips.

The choked air began, too, to fail in the narrow space now left it, and
the first symptoms of asphyxia began to oppress Rodolph; the arteries of
his temples beat violently, his head became giddy, and the faint
sickness of death seemed to make his chest heave convulsively. Already
were the waters gurgling in his ears; a dizziness of sight and a
confusion of ideas had well-nigh deprived him of all powers of sight or
sound; the last glimmer of reason was well-nigh shaken from her throne,
when hasty steps and the sound of voices on the other side of the door
were heard.

Hope recalled his expiring strength, and, making one powerful effort,
Rodolph was able to distinguish the following words, after which all
consciousness forsook him:

"Did I not tell you so? There, you see there is no one here!"

"Deuce take it! no more there is," replied the voice of the Chourineur,
in a tone of vexation and disappointment. And the sounds died away.

Rodolph, utterly exhausted, had no longer power to sustain himself; his
limbs sunk from under him, and he slid unresistingly down the stone
steps.

All at once the door of the vault was abruptly opened from the other
side, and the swelling masses contained in the inner vault, glad to find
a further outlet, rushed onwards as though bursting through the gates of
a sluice, and the Chourineur, whose opportune return shall be accounted
for by and by, seized the two arms of Rodolph, who, half dead, had
mechanically clung to the threshold of the door, and bore him from the
black and rushing waters which had nigh proved his grave.




CHAPTER XVI.

THE SICK-NURSE.


Snatched by the Chourineur from a certain death, and removed to the
house in the Allée des Veuves which had been reconnoitred by the
Chouette, previously to the attempt on it by the Schoolmaster, Rodolph
was placed in bed, in a comfortably furnished apartment; a cheerful fire
was burning on the hearth. A lamp, placed on a neighbouring table,
diffused a strong, clear light; while the bed of Rodolph, shaded by
thick curtains of green damask, remained protected from the glare, and
in the shadow of its deep recess.

A negro of middle stature, with white hair and eyebrows, wearing an
orange and green riband at the buttonhole of his blue coat, sat by the
bedside, holding in his right hand a seconds' watch, which he appeared
to consult while counting with his left the beating of Rodolph's pulse.
The expression of the negro's countenance was at once sad and pensive,
and he continued from time to time to gaze on the sleeping man with the
most tender solicitude.

The Chourineur, clad in rags and soiled with mud, stood motionless, with
folded arms, at the foot of the bed; his red beard was long and matted,
in disorder; his thick, bushy hair was tangled with mud and wet, which
still dripped from it; while his hard, bronzed features were marked by
the most profound pity for the patient: hardly venturing to breathe lest
the heaving of his huge chest should disturb the invalid, he awaited
with the most intense anxiety the result of the doctor's observations
on the sick man's state; then, as though to while away the fearful
apprehension of an unfavourable opinion, he continued to deliver his
thoughts aloud, after the following manner:

"Who would think, now, to see him lying there so helpless, he could ever
have been the man to give me such a precious drubbing as I got from him?
I dare say, though, he will soon be up again, well and strong as ever.
Don't you think so, M. le Docteur? Faith, I only wish he could drum
himself well upon my back; I'd lend it him as long as he liked. But,
perhaps, that would shake him too much, and overfatigue him; would it,
sir?" addressing the negro, whose only reply was an impatient wave of
the hand.

The Chourineur was instantly silent.

"The draught!" said the doctor.

The Chourineur, who had respectfully left his nailed shoes at the door,
at these words arose, and walked towards the table indicated by the
negro's finger; going on the very top of his toes, drawing up his legs,
extending his arms, and swelling out his back and shoulders, in a manner
so ludicrous as, under other circumstances, would have been highly
diverting. The poor fellow seemed endeavouring to collect his whole
weight, so that no portion of it should touch the floor; which, in spite
of his energetic efforts to prevent it, groaned beneath his ponderous
limbs as they moved towards the desired spot. Unfortunately, between his
overanxiety to acquit himself well in his important mission, and his
fear of dropping the delicate phial he was bringing so overcarefully, he
grasped the slight neck so tightly in his huge hand that it shivered to
atoms, and the precious liquid was expended on the carpet.

At the sight of this unfortunate mischance the Chourineur remained in
mute astonishment, one of his huge legs in the air, his toes nervously
contracted, and looking with a stupefied air alternately from the
doctor to the fragments of the bottle, and from that to the morsel his
thumb and finger were yet tightly holding.

"Awkward devil!" exclaimed the negro, impatiently.

"Yes, that I am!" responded the Chourineur, as though grateful for the
sound of a voice to break the frightful bewilderment of his ideas.

"Ah!" cried the Æsculapius, observing the table attentively, "happily
you took the wrong phial,--I wanted the other one."

"What, that little one with the red stuff?" inquired the unlucky
sick-nurse, in a low and humble tone.

"Of course I mean that; why, there is no other left."

The Chourineur, turning quickly around upon his heels, after his old
military fashion, crushed the fragments of glass which lay on the carpet
beneath his feet. More delicate ones might have suffered severely from
the circumstance, but the _ex-débardeur_ had a pair of natural sandals,
hard as the hoofs of a horse.

"Have a care!" cried the physician. "You will hurt yourself!"

To this caution the Chourineur paid no attention, but seemed wholly
absorbed in so discharging his new mission as should effectually destroy
all recollection of his late clumsiness. It was really beautiful to
behold the scrupulous delicacy and lightness of touch with which,
spreading out his two first fingers, he seized the fragile crystal;
avoiding all use of the unlucky thumb whose undue pressure, he rightly
conceived, had brought about his previous accident, he kept so widely
stretched from his forefinger that a butterfly might have passed
between, with outspread wings, without losing one atom of its golden
plumage. The black doctor trembled lest all this caution should lead to
a second misadventure, but, happily, the phial reached its destination
in safety. As the Chourineur approached the bed, he again smashed
beneath his tread some of the fallen relics of the former potion.

"The deuce take you, man! Do you want to _maim_ yourself for life?"

"_Lame_ myself?" asked the eager nurse.

"Why, yes; you keep walking upon glass as though you were trying for
it."

"Oh, bless you! never mind that; the soles of my feet are hard as iron;
must be something sharper than glass could hurt them."

"A teaspoon--" said the doctor.

The Chourineur recommenced his _évolutions sylphidiques_, and returned
with the article required.

After having swallowed a few spoonfuls of the mixture, Rodolph began to
stir in his bed, and faintly moved his hands.

"Good! good! he is recovering from his stupor," said the doctor,
speaking to himself. "That bleeding has relieved him; he is now out of
danger."

"Saved? Bravo! Vive la Charte!" exclaimed the Chourineur, in the full
burst of his joy.

"Hold your tongue! and pray be quiet!" said the negro, in a tone of
command.

"To be sure I will, M. le Médécin."

"His pulse is becoming regular--very well, indeed--excellent--"

"And that poor friend of M. Rodolph's,--body and bones of me!--when he
comes to know that--But, then, luckily--"

"Silence! I say."

"Certainly, M. le Docteur."

"And sit down."

"But, M. le--"

"Sit down, I tell you! You disturb me, twisting and fidgeting about in
that manner,--you distract my attention. Come, sit down at once, and
keep still."

"But, doctor, don't you perceive I am as dirty as a pile of floating
wood just going to be unloaded?--all slime and wet, you see. I should
spoil the furniture."

"Then sit down on the ground."

"I should soil the carpet."

"Do what you like, but, for heaven's sake, be quiet!" said the doctor,
in a tone of impatience; then, throwing himself into an armchair, he
leaned his head upon his clasped hands, and appeared lost in deep
reflection.

After a moment of profound meditation, the Chourineur, less from any
need he felt for repose than in obedience to the doctor's commands, took
a chair with the utmost precaution, turned it upside down with an air of
intense self-satisfaction at having at length devised a plan to act in
strict conformity with the orders received, and yet avoid all risk of
soiling the silken cushion; having laid the back on the ground, he
proceeded, after all manner of delicate arrangements, to take his seat
on the outer rails; but, unhappily, the Chourineur was entirely ignorant
of the laws of the lever and the equilibrium of bodies, the chair
overbalanced, and the luckless individual seated thereon, in
endeavouring to save himself from falling, by an involuntary movement
caught hold of a small stand, on which was a tray containing some
tea-things.

At the formidable noise caused by so many falling articles clattering
upon the head of the unfortunate cause of all this discord and havoc,
the doctor sprung from his seat, while Rodolph, awaking with a start,
raised himself on his elbow, looked about him with an anxious and
perturbed glance, then, passing his hand over his brows, as though
trying to arrange his ideas, he inquired:

"Where is Murphy?"

"Your royal highness need be under no apprehensions on his account,"
answered the negro, respectfully; "there is every hope of his recovery."

"Recovery! He is, then, wounded?"

"Unhappily, my lord, he is."

"Where is he? Let me see him!" And Rodolph endeavoured to rise, but fell
back again, overcome by weakness and the intense pain he felt from his
many and severe contusions. "Since I cannot walk," cried he, at length,
"let me be instantly carried to Murphy,--this moment!"

"My lord, he sleeps at present; it would be highly dangerous, at this
particular juncture, to expose him to the slightest agitation."

"You are deceiving me, and he is dead! He has been murdered! And I--I am
the wretched cause of it!" cried Rodolph, in a tone of agony, raising
his clasped hands towards heaven.

"My lord knows that his servant is incapable of a falsehood. I assert by
my honour, that, although severely wounded, Murphy lives, and that his
chance of recovery is all but certain."

"You say that but to prepare me for more disastrous tidings; he lies,
doubtless, wounded past all hope; and he, my faithful friend, will die!"

"My lord--"

"Yes, you are seeking to deceive me till all is over. But I will see
him,--I will judge for myself; the sight of a friend cannot be hurtful.
Let me be instantly removed to his chamber."

"Once more, my lord, I pledge my solemn assurance, that, barring chances
not likely to occur, Murphy will soon be convalescent."

"My dear David, may I indeed believe you?"

"You may, indeed, my lord."

"Hear me. You know the high opinion I entertain of your ability and
knowledge, and that, from the hour in which you were attached to my
household, you have possessed my most unbounded confidence,--never, for
one instant, have I doubted your great skill and perfect acquaintance
with your profession; but I conjure you, if a consultation be
necessary--"

"My lord, that would have been my first thought, had I seen the
slightest reason for such a step; but, up to the present moment, it
would be both useless and unnecessary. And, besides, I should be
somewhat tenacious of introducing strangers into the house until I knew
whether your orders of yesterday--"

"But how has all this happened?" said Rodolph, interrupting the black.
"Who saved me from drowning in that horrid cellar? I have a confused
recollection of having heard the Chourineur's voice there; was I
mistaken?"

"Not at all mistaken, my lord. But let the brave fellow, to whom all
praise is due, relate the affair in which he was the principal actor
himself."

"Where is he? Where is he?"

The doctor looked about for the recently elected sick-nurse, and at
length found him, thoroughly silenced and shamed by his late tumble,
ensconced behind the curtains of the bed.

"Here he is," said the doctor; "he looks somewhat shamefaced."

"Come forward, my brave fellow!" said Rodolph, extending his hand to his
preserver.

The confusion of the poor Chourineur was still further increased from
having, when behind his curtain, heard the black doctor address Rodolph
continually as "my lord," or "your royal highness."

"Approach, my friend,--my deliverer!" said Rodolph, "and give me your
hand."

"I beg pardon, sir,--I mean, my lord,--no, highness,--no--"

"Call me M. Rodolph, as you used to do; I like it better."

"And so do I,--it comes so much easier to one. But be so good as to
excuse my hand; I have done so much work lately, that--"

"Your hand, I tell you,--your hand!"

Overcome by this kind and persevering command, the Chourineur timidly
extended his black and horny palm, which Rodolph warmly shook.

"Now, then, sit down, and tell me all about it,--how you discovered the
cellar. But I think I can guess. The Schoolmaster?"

"We have him in safety," said the black doctor.

"Yes, he and the Chouette, tied together like two rolls of tobacco. A
pair of pretty creatures they look, as ever you would wish to see, and,
I doubt not, sick enough of each other's company by this time."

"And my poor Murphy! What a selfish wretch must I be to think only of
myself! Where is he wounded, David?"

"In the right side, my lord; but, fortunately, towards the lower false
rib."

"Oh, I must have a deep and terrible revenge for this! David, I depend
upon your assistance."

"My lord knows full well that I am wholly devoted to him, both body and
soul," replied the negro, coldly.

"But how, my noble fellow, were you able to arrive here in time?" said
Rodolph to the Chourineur.

"Why, if you please, my lor--no, sir--highness--Rodolph--I had better
begin by the beginning--"

"Quite right. I am listening,--go on. But mind, you are only to call me
M. Rodolph."

"Very well. You know that last night you told me, after you returned
from the country, where you had gone with poor Goualeuse, 'Try and find
the Schoolmaster in the Cité; tell him you know of a capital "put-up,"
that you have refused to join it, but that if he will take your place he
has only to be to-morrow (that's to-day) at the barrier of Bercy, at the
Panier-Fleuri, and there he will see the man who has "made the plant"
(_qui a nourri le poupard_).'"

"Well."

"On leaving you, I pushed on briskly for the Cité. I goes to the
ogress's,--no Schoolmaster; then to the Rue Saint Eloi; on to the Rue
aux Fêves; then to the Rue de la Vieille Draperie,--couldn't find my
man. At last I stumbled upon him and that old devil's kin, Chouette, in
the front of Notre Dame, at the shop of a tailor, who is a 'fence'[8]
and thief; they were 'sporting the blunt' which they had prigged from
the tall gentleman in black, who wanted to do something to you; they
bought themselves some toggery. The Chouette bargained for a red
shawl,--an old monster! I told my tale to the Schoolmaster and he
snapped at it, and said he would be at the rendezvous accordingly. So
far so good. This morning, according to your orders, I ran here to bring
you the answer. You said to me, 'My lad, return to-morrow before
daybreak; you must pass the day in the house, and in the evening you
will see something which will be worth seeing.' You did not let out more
than that, but I was 'fly,' and said to myself, 'This is a "dodge" to
catch the Schoolmaster to-morrow, by laying a right bait for him. He is
a----scoundrel; he murdered the cattle-dealer, and, as they say, another
person besides, in the Rue du Roule. I see all about it--'"

  [8] Receiver of stolen goods.

"My mistake was not to have told you all, my good fellow; then this
horrible result would not have occurred."

"That was your affair, M. Rodolph; all that concerned me was to serve
you; for, truth to say, I don't know how or why, but, as I have told you
before, I feel as if I were your bulldog. But that's enough. I said,
then, 'M. Rodolph pays me for my time, so my time is his, and I will
employ it for him.' Then an idea strikes me: the Schoolmaster is
cunning, he may suspect a trap. M. Rodolph will propose to him the job
for to-morrow, it is true, but the 'downy cove' is likely enough to come
to-day and lurk about, and reconnoitre the ground, and if he is
suspicious of M. Rodolph he will bring some other 'cracksman' (robber)
with him, and do the trick on his own account. To prevent this, I said
to myself, 'I must go and plant myself somewhere where I may get a view
of the walls, the garden-gate,--there is no other entrance. If I find a
snug corner, as it rains, I will remain there all day, perhaps all
night, and to-morrow morning I shall be all right and ready to go to M.
Rodolph's.' So I goes to the Allée des Veuves to place myself, and what
should I see but a small tavern, not ten paces from your door! I entered
and took my seat near the window, in a room on the ground floor. I
called for a quart of drink and a quart of nuts, saying I expected some
friends,--a humpbacked man and a tall woman. I chose them because it
would appear more natural. I was very comfortably seated, and kept my
eye on the door. It rained cats and dogs; no one passed; night came
on--"

"But," interrupted Rodolph, "why did you not go at once to my house?"

"You told me to come the next day morning, M. Rodolph, and I didn't dare
return there sooner; I should have looked like an intruder,--a sneak
(_brosseur_), as the troopers call it. You understand? Well, there I was
at the window of the wine-shop, cracking my nuts and drinking my liquor,
when, through the fog, I saw the Chouette approach, accompanied by Bras
Rouge's brat, little Tortillard. 'Ah, ah!' said I to myself, 'now the
farce begins!' Well, the little hound of a child hid himself in one of
the ditches of the Allée, and was evidently on the lookout. As for
that----, the Chouette, she takes off her bonnet, puts it into her
pocket, and rings the gate-bell. Our poor friend, M. Murphy, opens the
door, and the one-eyed mother of mischief tosses up her arms and makes
her way into the garden. I could have kicked myself for not being able
to make out what the Chouette was up to. At last out she comes, puts on
her bonnet, says two words to Tortillard, who returns to his hole, and
then 'cuts her stick.' I say to myself, 'Caution! no blunder now!
Tortillard has come with the Chouette; then the Schoolmaster and M.
Rodolph are at Bras Rouge's. The Chouette has come out to reconnoitre
about the house; then, sure as a gun, they'll "try it on" this very
night! If they do, M. Rodolph, who believes they will not go to work
till to-morrow, is quite over-reached; and if he is over-reached, I
ought to go to Bras Rouge's and see for him. True; but then suppose that
the Schoolmaster arrives in the meantime,--that's to be thought of.
Suppose I go to the house and see M. Murphy,--mind your eye! that urchin
Tortillard is near the door; he will hear me ring the bell, see me, and
give the word to the Chouette; and if she returns, that will spoil all;
and the more particularly as perhaps M. Rodolph has, after all, made his
arrangements for this evening.' Confound it! these yes and no bothered
my brain tremendously. I was quite bewildered, and saw nothing clear
before me. I didn't know what to do for the best, so I said, 'I'll walk
out, and perhaps the clear air will brighten my thoughts a bit.' I went
out, and the open air cleared my brain; so I took off my blouse and my
neck-handkerchief, I went to the ditch where Tortillard lay, and taking
the young devil's kin by the cuff of his neck,--how he did wriggle, and
twist, and scuffle, and scratch!--I put him into my blouse, tying up one
end with the sleeves and the bottom tightly with my cravat. He could
breathe very well. Well, then I took the bundle under my arm, and
passing a low, damp garden, surrounded by a little wall, I threw the
brat Tortillard into the midst of a cabbage-bed. He squeaked like a
sucking-pig, but nobody could hear him two steps off. I cut off; it was
time. I climbed up one of the high trees in the Allée, just in front of
your door, and over the ditch in which Tortillard had been stationed.
Ten minutes afterwards I heard footsteps; it was raining still, and the
night was very dark. I listened,--it was the Chouette. 'Tortillard!
Tortillard!' says she, in a low voice. 'It rains, and the little brat is
tired of waiting,' said the Schoolmaster, swearing; 'if I catch him,
I'll skin him alive!' '_Fourline_, take care!' replied the Chouette.
'Perhaps he has gone to warn us of something that has happened,--maybe,
some trap for us. The young fellow would not make the attempt till ten
o'clock.' 'That's the very reason,' replies the Schoolmaster; 'it is now
only seven o'clock. You saw the money,--nothing venture, nothing have.
Give me the ripping chisel and the jemmy--'"

"What instruments are they?" asked Rodolph.

"They came from Bras Rouge's. Oh, he has a well-furnished house! In a
crack the door is opened. 'Stay where you are,' said the Schoolmaster to
the Chouette; 'keep a bright lookout, and give me the signal if you hear
anything.' 'Put your "pinking-iron" in the buttonhole of your waistcoat,
that you may have it handy,' said the old hag. The Schoolmaster entered
the garden, and I instantly, coming down from the tree, fell on the
Chouette. I silenced her with two blows of my fist,--my new style,--and
she fell without a word. I ran into the garden, but, thunder and
lightning, M. Rodolph! it was too late--"

"Poor Murphy!"

"He was struggling on the ground with the Schoolmaster at the entrance,
and, although wounded, he held his voice and made no cry for help.
Excellent man! he is like a good dog, bites, but doesn't bark. Well, I
went bang, heads or tails, at it, hitting the Schoolmaster on the
shoulder, which was the only place I could at the moment touch. 'Vive la
Charte! it's I!' 'The Chourineur!' shouts M. Murphy. 'Ah, villain! where
do you come from?' cries out the Schoolmaster, quite off his guard at
that. 'What's that to you?' says I, fixing one of his legs between my
knees, and grasping his 'fin' with my other hand; it was that in which
he held his dagger. 'And M. Rodolph?' asked M. Murphy of me, whilst
doing all in his power to aid me--"

"Worthy, kind-hearted creature!" murmured Rodolph, in a tone of deep
distress.

"'I know nothing of him,' says I; 'this scoundrel, perhaps, has killed
him.' And then I went with redoubled strength at the Schoolmaster, who
tried to stick me with his larding-pin; but I lay with my breast on his
arm, and so he only had his fist at liberty. 'You are, then, quite
alone?' says I to M. Murphy, whilst we still struggled desperately with
the Schoolmaster. 'There are people close at hand,' he replied; 'but
they did not hear me cry out.' 'Is it far off?' 'They would be here in
ten minutes.' 'Let us call out for help; there are passers-by who will
come and help us.' 'No, as we have got him we must hold him here. But I
am growing weak, I am wounded.' 'Thunder and lightning! then run and get
assistance, if you have strength left; I will try and hold him.' M.
Murphy then disengaged himself, and I was alone with the Schoolmaster. I
don't want to brag, but, by Jove! these were moments when I was not
having a holiday. We were half on the ground, half on the bottom step of
the flight. I had my arms round the neck of the villain, my cheek
against his cheek; and he was puffing like a bull, I heard his teeth
grind. It was dark, it rained pouring; the lamp left in the passage
lighted us a little. I had twisted one of my legs around his, but, in
spite of that, his loins were so powerful that he moved himself and me
on to the bare ground. He tried to bite me, but couldn't; I never felt
so strong. Thunder! my heart beat, but it was in the right place. I
said, 'I am like a man who is grappling with a mad dog, to prevent him
from fastening on some passer-by.' 'Let me go, and I will do you no
harm,' said the Schoolmaster, in an exhausted voice. 'What! a coward?'
says I to him. 'So, then, your pluck is in your strength? So you
wouldn't have stabbed the cattle-dealer at Poissy, and robbed him, if he
had only been as strong as me, eh?' 'No,' says he; 'but I will kill you
as I did him.' And saying that, he made so violent a heave, and gave so
powerful a jerk with his legs at the same time, that he half threw me
over; if I had not kept a tight hold of his wrist which held the
stiletto, I was done for. At this moment my left hand was seized with
the cramp, and I was compelled to loosen my hold; that nearly spoiled
all, and I said to myself, 'I am now undermost and he at top,--he'll
kill me. Never mind, I had rather be in my place than his; M. Rodolph
said that I had heart and honour.' I felt it was all over with me, and
at that moment I saw the Chouette standing close by us, with her glaring
eye and red shawl. Thunder and lightning! I thought I had the nightmare.
'Finette,' cries the Schoolmaster, 'I have let fall the knife; pick it
up, there, there, under him, and strike him home, in the back, between
the shoulders; quick! quick!' 'Only wait, only wait till I find it, till
I see it, _fourline_.' And then the cursed Chouette turned and poked
about us, like an old bird of mischief as she was. At last she found the
dagger and sprung towards it, but as I was flat on my belly I gave her a
kick in the stomach, which sent her neck over crop; she got up, and in a
desperate rage. I could do no more; I still held on and struggled with
the Schoolmaster, but he kept giving me such dreadful blows on my jaw
that I was about to let go my hold, when I saw three or four armed men
who came down the stairs, and M. Murphy, pale as ashes, and with
difficulty supporting himself with the assistance of the doctor here.
They seized hold of the Schoolmaster and the Chouette, and soon bound
them hand and foot. That was not all, I still wanted M. Rodolph. I
sprang at the Chouette; remembering the tooth of the poor dear
Goualeuse, I grasped her arm and twisted it, saying, 'Where is M.
Rodolph?' She bore it well, and silently. I took a second turn, and then
she screeched out, 'At Bras Rouge's, in the vault at the Bleeding
Heart!' All right! As I went, I meant to take Tortillard from his
cabbage-bed, as it was on my road. I looked for him, but only found my
blouse,--he had gnawed his way out with his teeth. I reached the
Bleeding Heart, and I laid hold of Bras Rouge. 'Where is the young man
who came here this evening with the Schoolmaster?' 'Don't squeeze so
hard, and I'll tell you. They wanted to play him a trick and shut him up
in my cellar; we'll go now and let him out.' We went down, but there was
no one to be seen. 'He must have gone out whilst my back was turned,'
says Bras Rouge; 'you see plain enough he is not here.' I was going away
sad enough, when, by the light of the lantern, I saw at the bottom of
the cellar another door. I ran towards it and opened the door, and had,
as it were, a pail of water thrown at me. I saw your two poor arms in
the air. I fished you out and brought you here on my back, as there was
nobody at hand to get a coach. That's all my tale, M. Rodolph; and I may
say, without bragging, that I am satisfied with myself."

"My man, I owe my life to you; it is a heavy debt, but be assured I will
pay it. David, will you go and learn how Murphy is," added Rodolph, "and
return again instantly?"

The black went out.

"Where is the Schoolmaster, my good fellow?"

"In another room, with the Chouette. You will send for the police, M.
Rodolph?"

"No."

"You surely will not let him go! Ah, M. Rodolph, none of that
nonsensical generosity! I say again, he is a mad dog,--let the
passengers look out!"

"He will never bite again, be assured."

"Then you are going to shut him up somewhere?"

"No; in half an hour he will leave this house."

"The Schoolmaster?"

"Yes."

"Without _gens-d'armes_?"

"Yes."

"_He_ will go out from here, and free?"

"Free."

"And quite alone?"

"Quite alone."

"But he will go--"

"Wherever he likes," said Rodolph, interrupting the Chourineur with a
meaning smile.

The black returned.

"Well, David, well, and how is Murphy?"

"He sleeps, my lord," said the doctor, despondingly; "his respiration is
very difficult."

"Not out of danger?"

"His case is very critical, my lord; yet there is hope."

"Oh, Murphy! vengeance! vengeance!" exclaimed Rodolph, in a tone of
concentrated rage. Then he added, "David, a word--"

And he whispered something in the ear of the black. He started back.

"Do you hesitate?" said Rodolph. "Yet I have often suggested this idea
to you; the moment is come to put it into practice."

"I do not hesitate, my lord; the suggestion is well worthy the
consideration of the most elevated jurists, for this punishment is at
the same time terrible and yet fruitful for repentance. In this case it
is most applicable. Without enumerating the crimes which have
accumulated to send this wretch to the Bagne for his life, he has
committed three murders,--the cattle-dealer, Murphy, and yourself; it is
in his case justice--"

"He will have before him an unlimited horizon for expiation," added
Rodolph. After a moment's silence he resumed: "And five thousand francs
will suffice, David?"

"Amply, my lord."

"My good fellow," said Rodolph to the bewildered Chourineur, "I have two
words to say to M. David; will you go into that chamber on the other
side, where you will see a large red pocketbook on a bureau; open it and
take out five notes of a thousand francs each, and bring them to me."

"And," inquired the Chourineur, involuntarily, "who are those five
thousand francs for?"

"For the Schoolmaster. And do you, at the same time, tell them to bring
him in here."




CHAPTER XVII.

THE PUNISHMENT.


The scene we are about to describe took place in a room hung with red,
and brilliantly lighted. Rodolph, clothed in a long dressing-gown of
black velvet, which increased the pallor of his features, was seated
before a large table covered with a green cloth. On this table was the
Schoolmaster's pocketbook, the pinchbeck chain of the Chouette (to which
was suspended the little Saint Esprit of lapis lazuli), the
blood-stained stiletto with which Murphy had been stabbed, the crowbar
with which the door had been forced, and the five notes of a thousand
francs each, which the Chourineur had fetched out of the next apartment.

The negro doctor was seated at one side of the table, the Chourineur on
the other. The Schoolmaster, tightly bound with cords, and unable to
move a limb, was placed in a large armchair on casters, in the middle of
the salon. The people who had brought in this man had withdrawn, and
Rodolph, the doctor, the Chourineur, and the assassin were left alone.
Rodolph was no longer out of temper, but calm, sad, and collected; he
was about to discharge a solemn, self-imposed, and important duty. The
doctor was lost in meditation. The Chourineur felt an indescribable
fear; he could not take his eyes off Rodolph. The Schoolmaster's
countenance was ghastly; he was in an agony of fear. The most profound
silence reigned within; nothing was heard but the splash, splash of the
rain without, as it fell from the roof on to the pavement. Rodolph
addressed the Schoolmaster:

"Anselm Duresnel, you have escaped from the Bagne at Rochefort, where
you were condemned for life for forgery, robbery, and murder!"

"It's false!" said the Schoolmaster, in a hollow voice, and looking
about him with his restless and glaring glance.

"You are Anselm Duresnel, and you murdered and robbed a cattle-dealer on
the road to Poissy--"

"It's a lie!"

"You shall confess it presently."

The scoundrel looked at Rodolph with an air of astonishment.

"This very night you came here to rob, and you have stabbed the master
of this house--"

"It was you who suggested this robbery!" assuming an air of assurance.
"I was attacked, and I defended myself."

"The man you stabbed did not attack you,--he was unarmed. True, I did
suggest this robbery to you,--I'll tell you why. Last night only, after
having robbed a man and woman in the Cité, you offered to kill me for a
thousand francs--"

"I heard him," said the Chourineur.

The Schoolmaster darted at him a glance of deadliest hate.

Rodolph continued:

"You see there was no occasion to tempt you to do mischief."

"You are not my judge, and I will not answer you another question."

[Illustration: "_Rodolph Addressed the Schoolmaster_"
Etching by Mercier, after the drawing by Frank T. Merrill]

"I'll tell you why I proposed this robbery to you. I knew you were a
runaway convict,--you know the parents of the unfortunate girl, all
whose misfortunes have been caused by your miserable accomplice, the
Chouette. I wished to draw you here by the temptation of a robbery,
because this was the only temptation that could avail with you. Once in
my power, I leave you the choice of being handed over to the hands of
justice, which will make you pay with your head the assassination of the
cattle-dealer--"

"It is false! I did not commit that crime."

"Or of being conducted out of France, under my direction, to a place of
perpetual confinement, where your lot will be less painful than at the
Bagne; but I will only allow you this relaxation of punishment on
condition that you give me the information which I desire to acquire.
Condemned for life, you have broken away from your confinement, and by
seizing upon you and placing you hereafter beyond the possibility of
doing injury, I serve society; and from your confession I may, perhaps,
find the means of restoring to her family a poor creature much more
unfortunate than guilty. This was my first intention,--it was not legal;
but your escape and your fresh crimes forbid any such course on my part
now, and place you beyond all law. Yesterday, by a remarkable
revelation, I discovered that you are Anselm Duresnel--"

"It's false! I am not called Duresnel."

Rodolph took from the table the chain of the Chouette, and pointing to
the little Saint Esprit of lapis lazuli said, in a threatening voice:

"Sacrilege! You have prostituted to an infamous wretch this holy
relic,--thrice holy, for your infant boy had this pious gift from his
mother and grandmother!"

The Schoolmaster, dumfounded at this discovery, lowered his head and
made no response.

"You carried off your child from his mother fifteen years ago, and you
alone possess the secret of his existence. I had in this an additional
motive for laying hands on you when I had detected who you were. I seek
no revenge for what you have done to me personally, but to-night you
have again shed blood without provocation. The man you have assassinated
came to you in full confidence, not suspecting your sanguinary purpose.
He asked you what you wanted: 'Your money or your life!' and you stabbed
him with your poniard."

"So M. Murphy said when I first came to his aid," said the doctor.

"It's false! He lied!"

"Murphy never lies," said Rodolph, calmly. "Your crimes demand a
striking reparation. You came into this garden forcibly; you stabbed a
man that you might rob him; you have committed another murder; you ought
to die on this spot; but pity, respect for your wife and son, they shall
save you from the shame of a scaffold. It will be said that you were
killed in a brawl with weapons in your hand. Prepare, the means for your
punishment are at hand."

Rodolph's countenance was implacable. The Schoolmaster had remarked in
the next room two men, armed with carbines. His name was known; he
thought they were going to make away with him and bury in the shade his
later crimes, and thus spare his family the new opprobrium. Like his
fellows, this wretch was as cowardly as he was ferocious. Thinking his
hour was come, he trembled, and cried "Mercy!"

"No mercy for you," said Rodolph. "If your brains are not blown out
here, the scaffold awaits you--"

"I prefer the scaffold,--I shall live, at least, two or three months
longer. Why, why should I be punished at once? Mercy! mercy!"

"But your wife--your son--they bear your name--"

"My name is dishonoured already. If only for eight days, let me live! in
mercy do!"

"Not even that contempt of life which is sometimes displayed by the
greatest criminals!" said Rodolph, with disgust.

"Besides, the law forbids any one to take justice into their own hands,"
said the Schoolmaster, with assurance.

"The law! the _law!_" exclaimed Rodolph. "Do you dare to invoke the
law? you, who have always lived in open revolt and constant enmity
against society?"

The ruffian bowed his head and made no answer; then added, in a more
humble tone:

"At least, for pity's sake, spare my life!"

"Will you tell me where your son is?"

"Yes, yes, I will tell you all I know."

"Will you tell me who are the parents of the young girl whose childhood
the Chouette made one scene of torture?"

"In my pocketbook there are papers which will put you on the track of
the persons who gave her to the Chouette."

"Where is your son?"

"Will you let me live?"

"First make a full confession."

"And then, when I have told you all--" said the Schoolmaster with
hesitation.

"You have killed him!"

"No, no! I have confided him to one of my accomplices, who, when I was
apprehended, effected his escape."

"What did he do with him?"

"He brought him up, and gave him an education which fitted him to enter
into a banking-house at Nantes, so that we might get information, manage
an introduction to the banker, and so facilitate our plans. Although at
Rochefort, and preparing for my escape, I arranged this plan and
corresponded in cipher with my friend--"

"Oh, _mon Dieu!_ his child! his son! This man appals me!" cried Rodolph,
with horror, and hiding his head between his hands.

"But it was only of forgery that we thought," exclaimed the scoundrel;
"and when my son was informed what was expected of him, he was
indignant, told all to his employer, and quitted Nantes. You will find
in my pocketbook notes of all the steps taken to discover his traces.
The last place we ascertained he had lived in was the Rue du Temple,
where he was known under the name of François Germain; the exact address
is also in my pocketbook. You see I do not wish to conceal anything,--I
have told you everything I know. Now keep your promise. I only ask you
to have me taken into custody for _this_ night's robbery."

"And the cattle-merchant at Poissy?"

"That affair can never be brought to light,--there are no proofs. I own
it to _you_, in proof of the sincerity with which I am speaking, but
before any other person I should deny all knowledge of the business."

"You confess it, then, do you?"

"I was destitute, without the smallest means of living,--the Chouette
instigated me to do it; but now I sincerely repent ever having listened
to her. I do, indeed. Ah! would you but generously save me from the
hands of justice, I would promise you most solemnly to forsake all such
evil practices for the future."

"Be satisfied, your life shall be spared; neither will I deliver you
into the hands of the law."

"Do you, then, pardon me?" exclaimed the Schoolmaster, as though
doubting what he heard. "Can it be? Can you be so generous as to
forgive?"

"I both judge you and award your sentence," cried Rodolph, in a solemn
tone. "I will not surrender you to the power of the laws, because they
would condemn you to the galleys or the scaffold; and that must not be.
No, for many reasons. The galleys would but open a fresh field for the
development of your brutal strength and villainy, which would soon be
exercised in endeavouring to obtain domination over the guilty or
unfortunate beings you would be associated with, to render yourself a
fresh object of horror or of dread; for even crime has its ambition, and
yours has long consisted in a preëminence in vicious deeds and monstrous
vices, while your iron frame would alike defy the labours of the oar or
the chastisement of those set over you. And the strongest chains may be
broken, the thickest wall pierced through,--steep ramparts have been
scaled before now,--and you might one day burst your yoke and be again
let loose upon society, like an infuriated beast, marking your passage
with murder and destruction; for none would be safe from your Herculean
strength, or from the sharpness of your knife; therefore such
consequences must be avoided. But since the galleys might fail to stop
your infamous career, how is society to be preserved from your brutal
violence? The scaffold comes next in consideration--"

"It is my life, then, you seek!" cried the ruffian. "My life! Oh, spare
it!"

"Peace, coward! Hope not that I mean so speedy a termination to your
just punishment. No; your eager craving after a wretched existence would
prevent you from suffering the agony of anticipated death, and, far from
dwelling upon the scaffold and the block, your guilty soul would be
filled with schemes of escape and hopes of pardon; neither would you
believe you were truly doomed to die till in the very grasp of the
executioner; and even in that terrible moment it is probable that,
brutalised by terror, you would be a mere mass of human flesh, offered
up by justice as an expiatory offering to the manes of your victims.
That mode of settling your long and heavy accounts will not half pay the
debt. No; poor, wretched, trembling craven! we must devise a more
terrific method of atonement for you. At the scaffold, I repeat, you
would cling to hope while one breath remained within you; wretch that
you are, you would dare to hope! you, who have denied all hope and mercy
to so many unhappy beings! No, no! unless you repent, and that with all
your heart, for the misdeeds of your infamous life, I would (in this
world, at least) shut out from you the faintest glimmer of hope--"

"What man is this? What have I ever done to injure _him_?--whence comes
he thus to torture me?--where am I?" asked the Schoolmaster, in almost
incoherent tones, and nearly frantic with terror.

Rodolph continued:

"If even you could meet death with a man's courage, I would not have you
ascend the scaffold; for you it would be merely the arena in which, like
many others, you would make a disgusting display of hardened ferocity;
or, dying as you have lived, exhale your last sigh with an impious scoff
or profane blasphemy. That must not be permitted. It is a bad example to
set before a gazing crowd the spectacle of a condemned being making
sport of the instrument of death, swaggering before the executioner, and
yielding with an obscene jest the divine spark infused into man by the
breath of a creating God. To punish the body is easily done; to save the
soul is the great thing to be laboured for and desired. 'All sin may be
forgiven,' said our blessed Saviour, but from the tribunal to the
scaffold the passage is too short,--time and opportunity are required to
repent and make atonement; this leisure you shall have. May God grant
that you turn it to the right purpose!"

The Schoolmaster remained utterly bewildered; for the first time in his
life a vague and confused dread of something more horrible far than
death itself crossed his guilty mind,--he trembled before the
suggestions of his own imagination.

Rodolph went on:

"Anselm Duresnel, I will not sentence you to the galleys, neither shall
you die--"

"Then do you intend sending me to hell? or what are you going to do with
me?"

"Listen!" said Rodolph, rising from his seat with an air of menacing
authority. "You have wickedly abused the great bodily strength bestowed
upon you,--I will paralyse that strength; the strongest have trembled
before you,--I will make you henceforward shrink in the presence of the
weakest of beings. Assassin! murderer! you have plunged God's creatures
into eternal night; your darkness shall commence even in this life.
Now--this very hour--your punishment shall be proportioned to your
crimes. But," added Rodolph, with an accent of mournful pity, "the
terrible judgment I am about to pronounce will, at least, leave the
future open to your efforts for pardon and for peace. I should be guilty
as you are were I, in punishing you, to seek only for vengeance, just as
is my right to demand it; far from being unrelenting as death, your
sentence shall bring forth good fruits for hereafter; far from
destroying your soul, it shall help you to seek its salvation. If, to
prevent you from further violating the commandments of your Maker, I for
ever deprive you of the beauties of this outer world, if I plunge you
into impenetrable darkness, with no other companion than the remembrance
of your crimes, it is that you may incessantly contemplate their
enormity. Yes, separated for ever from this external world, your
thoughts must needs revert to yourself, and your vision dwell internally
upon the bygone scenes of your ill-spent life; and I am not without hope
that such a mental and constantly presented picture will send the blush
of shame even upon your hardened features, that your soul, deadened as
it now is to every good and holy impulse, will become softened and
tender by repentance. Your language, too, will be changed, and good and
prayerful words take place of those daring and blasphemous expressions
which now disgrace your lips. You are brutal and overbearing, because
you are strong; you will become mild and gentle when you are deprived of
that strength. Now your heart scoffs at the very mention of repentance,
but the day will come when, bowed to the earth with deep contrition, you
will bewail your victims in dust and ashes. You have degraded the
intelligence placed within you by a supreme power,--you have reduced it
to the brutal instincts of rapine and murder; from a man formed after
the image of his Creator, you have made yourself a beast of prey: one
day, as I trust and believe, that intelligence will be purified by
remorse and rendered again guiltless through divine expiation. You, more
inhuman than the beast which perisheth, have trampled on the tender
feelings by which even animals are actuated,--you have been the
destroyer of your partner and your offspring. After a long life,
entirely devoted to the expiation of your crimes, you may venture to
implore of the Almighty the great though unmerited happiness of
obtaining the pardon of your wife and son, and dying in their presence."

As Rodolph uttered these last words his voice trembled with emotion, and
he was obliged to conclude.

The Schoolmaster's terrors had, during this long discourse, entirely
yielded to an opinion that he was only to be subjected to a long lecture
on morality, and so forth, and then discharged upon his own promise of
amendment; for the many mysterious words uttered by Rodolph he looked
upon as mere vague expressions intended to alarm him,--nothing more.
Still further reassured by the mild tone in which Rodolph had addressed
him, the ruffian assumed his usually insolent air and manner as he said,
bursting into a loud and vulgar laugh:

"Well done, upon my word! A very good sermon, and very well spoken! Only
we must recollect where we leave off in our moral catechism, that we may
begin all right next lesson day. Come, let us have something lively now.
What do you say, master; will you guess a charade or two, just to
enliven us a bit?"

Instead of replying, Rodolph addressed the black doctor:

"Proceed, David! And if I do wrong, may the Almighty punish me alone!"

The negro rang; two men entered. David pointed to a side door, which
opened into an adjoining closet.

The chair in which the Schoolmaster remained bound, so as to be
incapable of the smallest movement, was then rolled into the anteroom.

"Are you going to murder me, then? Mercy! mercy!" shrieked the wretched
man, as he was being removed.

"Gag him!" cried the negro, entering the closet.

Rodolph and the Chourineur were left alone.

"M. Rodolph," said the Chourineur, pale and trembling, "M. Rodolph, what
is going to be done? I never felt so frightened. Pray speak; I must be
dreaming, surely. What have they done to the Schoolmaster? He does not
cry out,--all is so silent; it makes me more fearful still!"

At this moment David issued from the cabinet; his complexion had that
livid hue peculiar to the negro countenance, while his lips were ashy
pale.

The men who had conveyed the Schoolmaster into the closet now replaced
him, still bound in his chair, on the spot he had previously occupied in
Rodolph's presence.

"Unbind him, and remove the gag!" exclaimed David.

There was a moment of fearful silence while the two attendants relieved
the Schoolmaster of his gag and untied the cords which bound him to the
chair. As the last ligature gave way, he sprang up, his hideous
countenance expressing rage, horror, and alarm. He advanced one step
with extended hands, then, falling back into the chair, he uttered a cry
of unspeakable agony, and, raising his hands towards the ceiling,
exclaimed, with maddened fury:

"Blind, by heaven!"

"Give him this pocketbook, David," said Rodolph.

The negro placed a small pocketbook in the trembling hands of the
Schoolmaster.

"You will find in that pocketbook wherewithal to provide yourself with
a home and the means of living for the remainder of your days. Go, seek
out some safe and solitary dwelling, where, by humble repentance, you
may seek to propitiate an offended God! You are free! Go and repent; the
Lord is merciful, and his ears are ever open to such as truly repent."

"Blind! quite blind!" repeated the Schoolmaster, mechanically grasping
the pocketbook.

"Open the doors,--let him depart!" said Rodolph.

"Blind! blind!" repeated the bewildered and discomfited ruffian.

"You are free; you have the means of providing for yourself; begone!"

"And whither am I to go?" exclaimed he, with the most unbounded rage.
"You have taken away my sight; how, then, do I know in which direction
to go? Call you not this a crime thus to abuse your power over one
unhappily in your hands? Thus to--"

"To abuse my power!" repeated Rodolph, in a solemn voice. "And how have
you employed the power granted to you? How used _your_ superior
strength?"

"O Death! how gladly would I now accept you!" cried the wretched man.
"To be henceforward at every one's mercy,--to fear the weakest, the
smallest object!--a child might now master me! Gracious God! what will
become of me?"

"You have plenty of money."

"It will be taken from me!" cried the ruffian.

"Mark those words,--'It will be taken from me!' See how they fill you
with fear and dread! You have plundered so many, unmindful of their
helpless, destitute condition,--begone!"

"For the love of God," cried the Schoolmaster, in a suppliant tone, "let
some person lead me forth! What will become of me in the streets? Oh, in
mercy kill me! take my miserable life! but do not turn me out thus
wretched, thus helpless! Kill, for pity's sake, and save me from being
crushed beneath the first vehicle I encounter!"

"No! Live and repent."

"Repent!" shouted the Schoolmaster, in a fearful voice. "Never! I will
live for vengeance,--for deep and fearful vengeance!" And again he threw
himself from the chair, holding his clenched fists in a menacing
attitude towards the ceiling, as though calling upon Heaven to witness
the fixedness of his resolve. In an instant his step faltered; he again
hesitated, as though fearful of a thousand dangers.

"Alas! alas! I cannot proceed,--I dare not move! And I, lately so strong
and so dreaded by all,--look at me now! Yet no one pities me,--no one
cares for me,--no hand is stretched out to help the wretched blind upon
his lonely way!"

It is impossible to express the stupefaction and alarm expressed by the
countenance of the Chourineur during this terrible scene. His rough
features exhibited the deepest compassion for his fallen foe, and
approaching Rodolph, he said, in a low tone:

"M. Rodolph, he was an accomplished villain, and has only got what he
richly deserves; he wanted to murder me a little while ago, too. But he
is now blind,--he does not even know how to find his way out of the
house, and he may be crushed to death in the streets; may I lead him to
some safe place, where, at least, he may remain quiet for a time?"

"Nobly said!" replied Rodolph, kindly pressing the hand of the
Chourineur. "Go, my worthy fellow! Go with him, by all means!"

The Chourineur approached the Schoolmaster and laid his hand on his
shoulder; the miserable villain started.

"Who touches me?" asked he, in a husky voice.

"It is I."

"I? Who? Who are you,--friend or foe?"

"The Chourineur."

"And you have come to avenge yourself now you find I am incapable of
protecting myself, I suppose?"

"Nothing of the sort. Here, take my arm; you cannot find the way out by
yourself; let me lead you--there--"

"You, Chourineur? You!"

"Yes, for all you doubt it; but you vex me by not seeming to like my
help. Come, hold tight by me; I will see you all right before I leave
you."

"Are you quite sure you do not mean me some harm? that you are only
laying a trap to ensnare me?"

"I am not such a scoundrel as to take advantage of your misfortune. But
let us begone. Come on, old fellow; it will be daylight directly."

"Day! which I shall never more behold! Day and night to me are
henceforward all the same!" exclaimed the Schoolmaster, in such piteous
tones that Rodolph, unable longer to endure this scene, abruptly
retired, followed by David, who first dismissed his two assistants.

The Chourineur and the Schoolmaster remained alone. After a lengthened
silence the latter spoke first, by inquiring whether it were really true
that the pocketbook presented to him contained money.

"Yes, I can positively speak to its containing five thousand francs,"
replied the Chourineur, "since I put them in it with my own hand. With
that sum you could easily place yourself to board with some quiet, good
sort of people, who would look to you,--in some retired spot in the
country, where you might pass your days happily. Or would you like me to
take you to the ogress's?"

"She! she would not leave me a rap."

"Well, then, will you go to Bras Rouge?"

"No, no! He would poison me first and rob me afterwards."

"Well, then, where shall I take you?"

"I know not. Happily for both, you are no thief, Chourineur. Here, take
my pocketbook, and conceal it carefully in my waistcoat, that La
Chouette may not see it; she would plunder me of every sou."

"Oh, bless you! the Chouette is quite safe just now; she lies in the
Hôpital Beaujon. While I was struggling with you both to-night I
happened to dislocate her leg, so she's obliged to lie up for the
present."

"But what, in heaven's name, shall I do with this black curtain
continually before my eyes? In vain I try to push it away; it is still
there, fixed, immovable; and on its surface I see the pale, ghastly
features of those--"

He shuddered, and said in a low, hoarse voice, "Chourineur, did I quite
do for that man last night?"

"No."

"So much the better," observed the robber. And then, after some minutes'
silence, he exclaimed, under a fresh impulse of ungovernable fury, "And
it is you I have to thank for all this! Rascal! scoundrel! I hate you!
But for you, I should have 'stiffened' my man and walked off with his
money. My very blindness I owe to you; my curses upon you for your
meddling interference! But through you I should have had my blessed eyes
to see my own way with. How do I know what devil's trick you are
planning at this moment?"

"Try to forget all that is past,--it can't be helped now; and do not put
yourself in such a terrible way,--it is really very bad for you. Come,
come along--now, no nonsense--will you? yes or no?--because I am
regularly done up, and must get a short snooze somewhere. I can tell you
I have had a bellyful of such doings, and to-morrow I shall get back to
my timber-pile, and earn an honest dinner before I eat it. I am only
waiting to take you wherever you decide upon going, and then on goes my
nightcap and I goes to sleep."

"But how can I tell you where to take me, when I do not know myself? My
lodging--No, no, that will not do; I should be obliged to tell--"

"Well, then, hark ye. Will you, for a day or two, make shift with my
crib? I may meet with some decent sort of people, who, not knowing who
you really are, would receive you as a boarder; and we might say you
were a confirmed invalid, and required great care and perfect
retirement. Now I think of it, there is a person of my acquaintance,
living at Port St. Nicolas, has a mother, a very worthy woman, but in
humble circumstances, residing at St. Mandé: very likely she would be
glad to take charge of you. What do you say,--will you come or not?"

"One may trust you, Chourineur. I am not at all fearful of going, money
and all, to your place; happily you have kept yourself honest, amidst
all the evil example others have set you."

"Ay, and even bore the taunts and jests you used to heap upon me,
because I would not turn prig like yourself."

"Alas! who could foresee?"

"Now, you see, if I had listened to you, instead of trying to be of real
service to you, I should clean you out of all your cash."

"True, true. But you are a downright good fellow, and have neither
malice nor hatred in your heart," said the unhappy Schoolmaster, in a
tone of deep dejection and humility. "You are a vast deal better to me
than, I fear, I should have been to you under the same circumstances."

"I believe you, too. Why, M. Rodolph himself told me I had both heart
and honour."

"But who the devil is this M. Rodolph?" exclaimed the Schoolmaster,
breaking out fresh at the mention of his name. "He is not a man; he is a
monster,--a fiend,--a--"

"Hold, hold!" cried the Chourineur. "Now you are going to have another
fit, which is bad for you and very disagreeable to me, because it makes
you abuse my friends. Come, are you ready? Shall we set forth on our
journey?"

"We are going to your lodging, are we not, Chourineur?"

"Yes, yes, if you are agreeable."

"And you swear to me that you bear me no ill-will for the events of the
last twelve hours?"

"Swear it? Of course I swear it. Why, I have no ill-will against you nor
anybody."

"And you are certain that he (the man, I mean) is not dead?"

"I am as sure of it as that I am living myself."

"That will at least give me one crime the less to answer for. If they
only knew--And that little old man of the Rue du Roule--and that woman
of the Canal St. Martin--But it is useless thinking of all those things
now; I have enough to occupy my thoughts without trying to recall past
misfortunes. Blind! blind!" repeated the miserable wretch, as, leaning
on the arm of the Chourineur, he slowly took his departure from the
house in the Allée des Veuves.




CHAPTER XVIII.

THE ISLE-ADAM.


A month has elapsed since the occurrence of the events we have just
narrated. We now conduct the reader into the little town of the
Isle-Adam, situated in a delightful locality on the banks of the Oise,
and at the foot of a forest.

The least things become great events in the country; and so the idlers
of Isle-Adam, who were on the morning before us walking in the square
before the church, were very anxiously bestirring themselves to learn
when the individual would arrive who had recently become the purchaser
of the most eligible premises for a butcher in that town, and which were
exactly opposite to the church.

One of those idlers, more inquisitive than his companions, went and
asked the butcher-boy, who, with a merry face and active hands, was very
busy in completing the arrangements of the shop. This lad replied that
he did not know who was the new proprietor, for he had bought the
property through an agent. At this moment two persons, who had come from
Paris in a cabriolet, alighted at the door of the shop.

The one was Murphy, quite cured of his wound, and the other the
Chourineur. At the risk of repeating a vulgar saying, we will assert
that the impression produced by dress is so powerful, that the guest of
the "cribs" of the Cité was hardly to be recognised in his present
attire. His countenance had undergone the same change; he had put off,
with his rags, his savage, coarse, and vulgar air; and to see him walk
with both his hands in the pockets of his long and warm coat of dark
broadcloth, he might have been taken for one of the most inoffensive
citizens in the world.

"'Faith, my fine fellow, the way was long and the cold excessive; were
they not?"

"Why, I really did not perceive it, M. Murphy; I am too happy, and joy
keeps one warm. Besides, when I say happy, why--"

"What?"

"Yesterday you came to seek for me at the Port St. Nicolas, where I was
unloading as hard as I could to keep myself warm. I had not seen you
since the night when the white-haired negro had put out the
Schoolmaster's eyes. By Jove! it quite shook me, that affair did. And M.
Rodolph, what a countenance!--he who looked so mild and gentle! I was
quite frightened at that moment; I was, indeed--"

"Well, what then?"

"You said to me, 'Good day, Chourineur.' 'Good day, M. Murphy,' says I.
'What, you are up again, I see! So much the better,--so much the better.
And M. Rodolph?' 'He was obliged to leave Paris some days after the
affair of the Allée des Veuves, and he forgot you, my man.' 'Well, M.
Murphy, I can only say that if M. Rodolph has forgotten me, why--I shall
be very sorry for it, that's all.' 'I meant to say, my good fellow, that
he had forgotten to recompense your services, but that he should always
remember them.' So, M. Murphy, those words cheered me up again directly.
_Tonnerre!_ I--I shall never forget him. He told me I had heart and
honour,--that's enough."

"Unfortunately, my lad, monseigneur left without giving any orders about
you. I have nothing but what monseigneur gives me, and I am unable to
repay as I could wish all that I owe you personally."

"Come, come, M. Murphy, you are jesting with me."

"But why the devil did you not come back again to the Allée des Veuves
after that fatal night? Then monseigneur would not have left without
thinking of you."

"Why, M. Rodolph did not tell me to do so, and I thought that perhaps he
had no further occasion for me."

"But you might have supposed that he would, at least, desire to express
his gratitude to you."

"Did you not tell me that M. Rodolph has not forgotten me, M. Murphy?"

"Well, well, don't let us say another word about it; only I have had a
great deal of trouble to find you out. You do not now go to the
ogress's?"

"No."

"Why not?"

"Oh, from some foolish notions I have had."

"Very well. But to return to what you were telling me--"

"To what, M. Murphy?"

"You told me, I am glad I have found you, and still happy, perhaps--"

"Oh, yes, M. Murphy! Why, you see, when you came to where I was at work
at the timber-yard, you said, 'My lad, I am not rich, but I can procure
you a situation where your work will be easier than on the Quai, and
where you will gain four francs a day.' Four francs a day! Vive la
Charte! I could not believe it; 'twas the pay of an adjutant
sub-officer! I replied, 'That's the very thing for me, M. Murphy!' but
you said then that I must not look so like a beggar, as that would
frighten the employer to whom you would take me. I answered, 'I have not
the means of dressing otherwise.' You said to me, 'Come to the Temple.'
I followed you. I chose the most spicy attire that Mother Hubart
had,--you advanced me the money to pay her,--and in a quarter of an hour
I was as smart as a landlord or a dentist. You appointed me to meet you
this morning at the Porte St. Denis, at daybreak; I found you there in a
cab, and here we are."

"Well, do you find anything to regret in all this?"

"Why, I'll tell you, M. Murphy. You see, to be dressed in this way
spoils a fellow; and so, you see, when I put on again my old smock-frock
and trousers, I sha'n't like it. And then, to gain four francs a
day,--I, who never earned but two,--and that all at once! why, I seem to
have made too great a start all of a sudden, and that it cannot last. I
would rather sleep all my life on the wretched straw bed in my
cock-loft, than sleep five or six nights only in a good bed. That's my
view of the thing."

"And you are by no means peculiar in your view; but the best thing is to
sleep always in a good bed."

"And no mistake; it is better to have a bellyful of victuals every day
than to starve with hunger. Ah! here is a butchery here," said the
Chourineur, as he listened to the blows of the chopper which the boy was
using, and observed the quarters of beef through the curtains.

"Yes, my lad; it belongs to a friend of mine. Would you like to see it
whilst the horse just recovers his wind?"

"I really should, for it reminds me of my boyish days, if it was only
when I had Montfauçon for a slaughter-house and broken-down horses for
cattle. It is droll, but if I had the means, a butcher's is the trade in
which I should set up, for I like it. To go on a good nag to buy cattle
at fairs,--to return home to one's own fireside, to warm yourself if
cold, or dry yourself if wet,--to find your housekeeper, or a good,
jolly, plump wife, cheerful and pleasant, with a parcel of children to
feel in your pockets to see if you have brought them home anything! And
then, in the morning, in the slaughter-house, to seize an ox by the
horns, particularly when he's fierce,--_nom de nom!_ he must be
fierce!--then to put on the ring, to cleave him down, cut him up, dress
him,--_Tonnerre!_ that would have been my ambition, as it was the
Goualeuse's to suck barley-sugar when she was a little 'un. By the way,
that poor girl, M. Murphy,--not seeing her any more at the ogress's, I
supposed that M. Rodolph had taken her away from there. That's a good
action, M. Murphy. Poor child! she never liked to do wrong,--she was so
young! And then the habit! Ah, M. Rodolph has behaved quite right!"

"I am of your opinion. But will you come into the shop until our horse
has rested awhile?"

The Chourineur and Murphy entered the shop, and then went to see the
yard, where three splendid oxen and a score of sheep were fastened up;
they then visited the stable, the chaise-house, the slaughter-house, the
lofts, and the out-buildings of the house, which were all in excellent
order, and kept with a cleanliness and care which bespoke regularity and
easy circumstances.

When they had seen all but the up-stairs, Murphy said:

"You must own that my friend is a lucky fellow. This house and property
are his, without counting a thousand crowns in hand to carry on his
business with; and he is, besides, only thirty-eight, strong as a bull,
with an iron constitution, and very fond of his business. The
industrious and civil journeyman that you saw in the shop supplies his
place, with much capability, when he goes to the fairs to purchase
cattle. I say again, is he not a lucky fellow?"

"He is, indeed, M. Murphy. But, you see, there are lucky and unlucky
people; and when I think that I am going to gain four francs a day, and
know how many there are who only earn the half, or even less--"

"Will you come up and see the rest of the house?"

"With all my heart, M. Murphy."

"The person who is about to employ you is up-stairs."

"The person who is going to employ me?"

"Yes."

"Why, then, didn't you tell me that before?"

"I'll tell you--"

"One moment," said the Chourineur, with a downcast and embarrassed air,
taking Murphy by the arm; "listen whilst I say a word to you, which
perhaps M. Rodolph did not tell you, but which I ought not to conceal
from the master who employs me, because, if he is offended by it--why
then, you see--why, afterwards--"

"What do you mean to say?"

"I mean to say--"

"Well, what?"

"That I am a convict, who has served his time,--that I have been at the
Bagne," said Chourineur, in a low voice.

"Indeed!" replied Murphy.

"But I never did wrong to any one," exclaimed the Chourineur; "and I
would sooner die of hunger than rob; but I have done worse than rob," he
added, bending his head down; "I have killed my fellow creature in a
passion. But that is not all," he continued, after a moment's pause. "I
will tell everything to my employer; I would rather be refused at first
than detected afterwards. You know him, and if you think he would refuse
me, why, spare me the refusal, and I will go as I came."

"Come along with me," said Murphy.

The Chourineur followed Murphy up the staircase; a door opened, and they
were both in the presence of Rodolph.

"My good Murphy," said he, "leave us together awhile."




CHAPTER XIX.

RECOMPENSE.


"Vive la Charte!" cried the Chourineur. "How precious glad I am to see
you again, M. Rodolph--or, rather, my lord!"

"Good day, my excellent friend. I am equally glad to see you."

"Oh, what a joker M. Murphy is! He told me you had gone away. But stay,
my lord--"

"Call me M. Rodolph; I like that best."

"Well, then, M. Rodolph, I have to ask your pardon for not having been
to see you after the night with the Schoolmaster. I see now that I was
guilty of a great rudeness; but I do not suppose that you had any desire
to see me?"

"I forgive you," said Rodolph, smiling; and then added, "Murphy has
shown you all over the house?"

"Yes, M. Rodolph; and a fine house and fine shop it is,--all so neat and
so comfortable! Talking of comfortable, I am the man that will be so, M.
Rodolph! M. Murphy is going to put me in the way of earning four francs
a day,--yes, four francs a day!"

"I have something better than that to propose to you, my good fellow."

"Better! It's unpolite to contradict you, but I think that would be
difficult. Four francs a day!"

"I tell you I have something better: for this house, all that it
contains, the shop, and a thousand crowns which are in this
pocketbook,--all are yours."

The Chourineur smiled with a stupid air, flattened his long-napped hat
between his knees, and squeezed it convulsively, evidently not
understanding what Rodolph said to him, although his language was plain
enough.

Rodolph, with much kindness, said to him:

"I can imagine your surprise; but I again repeat, this house and this
money are yours,--they are your property."

The Chourineur became purple, passed his horny hand over his brow, which
was bathed with perspiration, and stammered out, in a faltering voice:

"What!--eh!--that is--indeed--my property!"

"Yes, your property; for I bestow it all upon you. Do you understand? I
give it to you."

The Chourineur rocked backwards and forwards on his chair, scratched his
head, coughed, looked down on the ground, and made no reply. He felt
that the thread of his ideas had escaped him. He heard quite well what
Rodolph said to him, and that was the very reason he could not credit
what he heard. Between the depth of misery, the degradation in which he
had always existed, and the position in which Rodolph now placed him,
there was an abyss so wide that the service he had rendered to Rodolph,
important as it was, could not fill it up.

"Does what I give you, then, seem beyond your hopes?" inquired Rodolph.

"My lord," said the Chourineur, starting up suddenly, "you offer me this
house and a great deal of money,--to tempt me; but I cannot take them; I
never robbed in my life. It is, perhaps, to kill; but I have too often
dreamed of the sergeant," added he, in a hoarse tone.

"Oh, the unfortunate!" exclaimed Rodolph, with bitterness. "The
compassion evinced for them is so rare, that they can only explain
liberality as a temptation to crime!"

Then addressing the Chourineur, in a voice full of gentleness:

"You judge me wrong,--you mistake: I shall require from you nothing but
what is honourable. What I give you, I give because you have deserved
it."

"I," said the Chourineur, whose embarrassments recommenced, "I deserve
it! How?"

"I will tell you. Abandoned from your infancy, without any knowledge of
right or wrong, left to your natural instinct, shut up for fifteen years
in the Bagne with the most desperate villains, assailed by want and
wretchedness, compelled by your own disgrace, and the opinion of honest
men, to continue to haunt the low dens infested by the vilest
malefactors, you have not only remained honest, but remorse for your
crime has outlived the expiation which human justice had inflicted upon
you."

This simple and noble language was a new source of astonishment for the
Chourineur; he contemplated Rodolph with respect, mingled with fear and
gratitude, but was still unable to convince himself that all he heard
was reality.

"What, M. Rodolph, because you beat me, because, thinking you a workman,
like myself, because you spoke 'slang' as if you had learned it from the
cradle, I told you my history over two bottles of wine, and afterwards I
saved you from being drowned,--you give me a house--money--I shall be
master! Say really, M. Rodolph, once more, is it possible?"

"Believing me like yourself, you told me your history naturally and
without concealment, without withholding either what was culpable or
generous. I have judged you, and judged you well, and I have resolved to
recompense you."

"But, M. Rodolph, it ought not to be; there are poor labourers who have
been honest all their lives, and who--"

"I know it, and it may be I have done for many others more than I am
doing for you; but, if the man who lives honestly in the midst of
honest men, encouraged by their esteem, deserves assistance and support,
he who, in spite of the aversion of good men, remains honest amidst the
most infamous associates on earth,--he, too, deserves assistance and
support. This is not all; you saved my life, you saved the life of
Murphy, the dearest friend I have; and what I do for you is as much the
dictate of personal gratitude as it is the desire to withdraw from
pollution a good and generous nature, which has been perverted, but not
destroyed. And that is not all."

"What else have I done, M. Rodolph?"

Rodolph took his hand, and, shaking it heartily, said:

"Filled with commiseration for the mischief which had befallen the very
man who had tried just before to kill you, you even gave him an asylum
in your humble dwelling,--No. 9, close to Notre Dame."

"You knew, then, where I lived, M. Rodolph?"

"If you forget the services you have done to me, I do not. When you left
my house you were followed, and were seen to enter there with the
Schoolmaster."

"But M. Murphy told me that you did not know where I lived, M. Rodolph."

"I was desirous of trying you still further; I wished to know if you had
disinterestedness in your generosity, and I found that, after your
courageous conduct, you returned to your hard daily labour, asking
nothing, hoping for nothing, not even uttering a word of reproach for
the apparent ingratitude with which I repaid your services; and when
Murphy yesterday proposed to you employment a little more profitable
than that of your habitual toil, you accepted it with joy, with
gratitude."

"Why, M. Rodolph, do you see, sir, four francs a day are always four
francs a day. As to the service I rendered you, why, it is rather I who
ought to thank you."

"How so?"

"Yes, yes, M. Rodolph," he added, with a saddened air, "I do not forget
that, since I knew you, it was you who said to me those two words,'You
have both heart and honour!' It is astonishing how I have thought of
that. They are only two little words, and yet those two words had that
effect. But, in truth, sow two small grains of anything in the soil, and
they will put forth shoots."

This comparison, just and almost poetical as it was, struck Rodolph. In
sooth, two words, but two magic words for the heart that understood
them, had almost suddenly developed the generous instincts which were
inherent in this energetic nature.

"You placed the Schoolmaster at St. Mandé?" said Rodolph.

"Yes, M. Rodolph. He made me change his notes for gold, and buy a belt,
which I sewed round his body, and in which I put his 'mopuses;' and
then, good day! He boards for thirty sous a day with good people, to
whom that sum is of much service. When I have time to leave my
wood-piles, I shall go and see how he gets on."

"Your wood-piles! You forget your shop, and that you are here at home!"

"Come, M. Rodolph, do not amuse yourself by jesting with a poor devil
like me; you have had your fun in 'proving' me, as you term it. My house
and my shop are songs to the same tune. You said to yourself,'Let us see
if this Chourineur is such a gulpin as to believe that I will make him
such a present.' Enough, enough, M. Rodolph; you are a wag, and there's
an end of the matter."

And he laughed long, loud, and heartily.

"But, once more, believe--"

"If I were to believe you, then you would say, 'Poor Chourineur! go! you
are a trouble to me now.'"

Rodolph began to be really troubled how to convince the Chourineur, and
said in a solemn, impressive, and almost severe tone:

"I never make sport of the gratitude and sympathy with which noble
conduct inspires me. I have said this house and this establishment are
yours, if they suit you, for the bargain is conditional. I swear to you,
on my honour, all this belongs to you; and I make you a present of it,
for the reasons I have already given."

The dignified and firm tone, and the serious expression of the features
of Rodolph, at length convinced the Chourineur. For some moments he
looked at his protector in silence, and then said, in a voice of deep
emotion:

"I believe you, my lord, and I thank you much. A poor man like me cannot
make fine speeches, but once more, indeed, on my word, I thank you very
much. All I can say is, that I will never refuse assistance to the
unhappy; because Hunger and Misery are ogresses of the same sort as
those who laid hands on the poor Goualeuse; and, once in that sink, it
is not every one that has the fist strong enough to pull you out again."

"My worthy fellow, you cannot prove your gratitude more than in speaking
to me thus."

"So much the better, my lord; for else I should have a hard job to prove
it."

"Come, now, let us visit your house; my good old Murphy has had the
pleasure, and I should like it also."

Rodolph and the Chourineur came down-stairs. At the moment they reached
the yard, the shopman, addressing the Chourineur, said to him,
respectfully:

"Since you, sir, are to be my master, I beg to tell you that our custom
is capital. We have no more cutlets or legs of mutton left, and we must
kill a sheep or two directly."

"_Parbleu!_" said Rodolph to the Chourineur; "here is a capital
opportunity for exercising your skill. I should like to have the first
sample,--the open air has given me an appetite, and I will taste your
cutlets."

"You are very kind, M. Rodolph," said the Chourineur, in a cheerful
voice; "you flatter me, but I will do my best."

"Shall I bring two sheep to the slaughter-house, master?" asked the
journeyman.

"Yes; and bring a well-sharpened knife, not too thin in the blade, and
strong in the back."

"I have just what you want, master. There, you could shave with it. Take
it--"

"_Tonnerre_, M. Rodolph!" said the Chourineur, taking off his upper coat
with haste, and turning up his shirtsleeves, which displayed a pair of
arms like a prize-fighter's; "this reminds me of my boyish days and the
slaughter-house. You shall see how I handle a knife! _Nom de nom!_ I
wish I was at it. The knife, lad! the knife! That's it; I see you know
your trade. This is a blade! Who will have it? _Tonnerre!_ with a tool
like this I could face a wild bull."

And the Chourineur brandished his knife,--his eyes began to fill with
blood; the beast was regaining the mastery; the instinct and thirst for
blood reappeared in all the fullness of their fearful predominance.

The butchery was in the yard,--a vaulted, dark place, paved with stones,
and lighted by a small, narrow opening at the top.

The man drove one of the sheep to the door.

"Shall I fasten him to the ring, master?"

"Fasten him! _Tonnerre!_ and I with my knees at liberty? Oh, no; I will
hold him here as fast as if in a vice. Give me the beast, and go back to
the shop."

The journeyman obeyed. Rodolph was left alone with the Chourineur, and
watched him attentively, almost anxiously.

"Now, then, to work!" said he.

"Oh, I sha'n't be long. _Tonnerre!_ you shall see how I handle a knife!
My hands burn, and I have a singing in my ears; my temples beat, as they
used when I was going to 'see red.' Come here, thou--Ah, _Madelon!_ let
me stab you dead!"

Then his eyes sparkled with a fierce delight, and, no longer conscious
of the presence of Rodolph, the Chourineur lifted the sheep without an
effort; with one spring he carried it off as a wolf would do, bounding
towards his lair with his prey.

Rodolph followed him, and leaned on one of the wings of the door, which
he closed. The butchery was dark; one strong ray of light, falling
straight down, lighted up, _à la Rembrandt_, the rugged features of the
Chourineur, his light hair, and his red whiskers. Stooping low, holding
in his teeth a long knife, which glittered in the "darkness visible," he
drew the sheep between his legs, and, when he had adjusted it, took it
by the head, stretched out its neck, and cut its throat.

At the instant when the sheep felt the keen blade, it gave one gentle,
low, and pitiful bleat, and, raising its dying eyes to the Chourineur,
two spurts of blood jetted forth into the face of its slayer. The cry,
the look, the blood that spouted out, made a fearful impression on the
man. His knife fell from his hands; his features grew livid, contracted,
and horrible, beneath the blood that covered them; his eyes expanded,
his hair stiffened; and then retreating, with a gesture of horror, he
cried, in a suffocating voice, "Oh, the sergeant! the sergeant!"

Rodolph hastened to him: "Recover yourself, my good fellow!"

"There! there! the sergeant!" repeated the Chourineur, retreating step
by step, with his eyes fixed and haggard, and pointing with his finger
as if at some invisible phantom. Then uttering a fearful cry, as if the
spectre had touched him, he rushed to the bottom of the butchery, into
the darkest corner; and there, with his face, breast, and arms against
the wall, as if he would break through it to escape from so horrible a
vision, he repeated, in a hollow and convulsive tone, "Oh, the sergeant!
the sergeant! the sergeant!"




CHAPTER XX.

THE DEPARTURE.


Thanks to the care of Murphy and Rodolph, who with difficulty calmed his
agitation, the Chourineur was completely restored to himself, and was
alone with the prince in one of the rooms on the first floor in the
house.

"My lord," said he, despondingly, "you have been very kind, indeed, to
me; but, hear me: I would rather be a thousand times more wretched than
I have yet been than become a butcher."

"Yet reflect a little."

"Why, my lord, when I heard the cry of the poor animal which could not
make the slightest resistance; when I felt its blood spring into my
face,--hot blood, which seemed as coming from a living thing; you cannot
imagine what I felt; then I had my dream all over again,--the sergeant
and those poor young fellows whom I cut and stabbed, who made no
defence, and died giving me a look so gentle, so gentle that they seemed
as if they pitied me! My lord, it would drive me mad!"

And the poor fellow hid his face in his hands with a convulsive start.

"Come, come, calm yourself."

"Excuse me, my lord; but just now the sight of blood--of a knife--I
could not bear; at every instant it would renew those dreams which I was
beginning to forget. To have every day my hands and feet in blood, to
cut the throats of poor animals who do not so much as make a
struggle--oh, no, no! I could not for the world. I would rather lose my
eyesight at once, like the Schoolmaster, than be compelled to follow
such a business."

It is impossible to depict the energetic gesture, action, and
countenance of the Chourineur, as he thus expressed himself. Rodolph was
deeply affected by it, and satisfied with the horrible effect which the
sight of the blood had caused to his protégé.

For a moment the savage feeling, the bloodthirsty instinct, had overcome
the human being in the Chourineur; but remorse eventually overwhelmed
the instinct. That was as it should be, and it was a fine lesson.

"Forgive me, my lord," said the Chourineur, in a faltering voice; "I
make but a bad recompense for all your kindness to me, but--"

"Not at all, my good fellow; I told you that our bargain was
conditional. I selected for you the business of a butcher, because your
inclinations and taste seemed to lie in that direction--"

"Alas! my lord, that's true; and, had it not been for what you know of,
that would have been the trade of all others I should have chosen. I was
only saying so to M. Murphy a little while since."

"As it was just possible that your taste did not lie that way, I have
thought of another arrangement for you. A person who has a large tract
of property at Algiers will give me up, for you, one of the extensive
farms he holds in that country. The lands belonging to it are very
fertile, and in full bearing; but I will not conceal from you, this
estate is situated on the boundaries of the Atlas mountains,--that is,
near the outposts, and exposed to the frequent attacks of the Arabs, and
one must be as much of a soldier as a husbandman: it is, at the same
time, a redoubt and a farm. The man who occupies this dwelling in the
absence of the proprietor will explain everything to you; they say he is
honest and faithful, and you may retain him there as long as you like.
Once established there, you will not only increase your means by your
labour and ability, but render a real service to your country by your
courage. The colonists have formed a militia, and the extent of your
property, the number of your tenants who will depend on you, will make
you the chief of a very considerable troop. Headed by your courage, this
band may be extremely useful in protecting the properties which are
throughout the plain. I repeat to you, that this prospect for you would
please me very much, in spite of, or, rather, in consequence of the
danger; because you could at the same time display your natural
intrepidity; and because, having thus expiated, and, as I may say,
ransomed yourself from a great crime, your restitution to society would
be more noble, more complete, more heroic, if it were worked out, in the
midst of perils in an unconquered clime, than in the midst of the quiet
inhabitants of a little town. If I did not first offer you this, it was
because it was probable that the other would suit you, and the latter is
so hazardous that I would not expose you to it without giving you the
choice. There is still time, and, if this proposition for Algiers does
not suit you, tell me so frankly, and we will look out for something
else; if not, to-morrow everything shall be signed, and you will start
for Algiers with a person commissioned by the former proprietor of the
farm to put you in full possession. Two years' rent will be due, and
paid to you on your arrival. The land yields three thousand francs a
year: work, improve it, be active, vigilant, and you will soon increase
your comfort and the security of the colonists, whom you will aid and
assist I am sure, for you will always be charitable and generous; and
remember, too, to be rich implies that we should give much away.
Although separated from you, I shall not lose sight of you, and never
forget that I and my best friend owe our lives to you. The only proof of
attachment and gratitude I ask, is to learn to write and read as quickly
as you can, that you may inform me regularly, once a week, what you do,
and to address yourself to me direct if you need any advice or
assistance."

It is useless to describe the extreme delight of the Chourineur. His
disposition, his instincts, are already sufficiently known to the
reader, so that he may understand that no proposal could have been made
more acceptable to him.

Next day all was arranged, and the Chourineur set out for Algiers.




CHAPTER XXI.

RESEARCHES.


The house which Rodolph had in the Allée des Veuves was not his usual
place of residence; he lived in one of the largest mansions in the
Faubourg St. Germain, situated at the end of the Rue Plumet and the
Boulevard des Invalides.

To avoid the honours due to his sovereign rank, the prince had preserved
his incognito since his arrival in Paris, his _chargé d'affaires_ at the
court of France having announced that his master would pay his official
and indispensable visits under the name and title of the Count de Duren.
Thanks to this usage (a very common one in the Northern courts), a
prince may travel with as much liberty as pleasure, and escape all the
bore of ceremonious introductions. In spite of his slight incognito,
Rodolph kept up in his mansion full state and etiquette. We will
introduce the reader into the hôtel of the Rue Plumet, the day after the
Chourineur had started for Algiers.

The clock had just struck ten, A.M. In the middle of a large salon on
the ground floor and which formed the antechamber to Rodolph's business
chamber, Murphy was seated before a bureau, and sealing several
despatches. A groom of the chambers, dressed in black and wearing a
silver chain around his neck, opened the folding-doors and announced:

"His Excellency M. le Baron de Graün."

Murphy, without ceasing from his employment, received the baron with a
nod at once cordial and familiar.

"M. le Chargé d'Affaires," said he, smiling, "will you warm yourself at
the fire? I will be at your service in one moment."

"M. the Private Secretary, I await your leisure," replied M. de Graün,
gaily, and making, with mock respect, a low and respectful bow to the
worthy squire.

The baron was about fifty years of age, with hair gray, thin, and
lightly curled and powdered. His chin, rather projecting, was partly
concealed in a high cravat of white muslin, starched very stiffly, and
of unimpeachable whiteness. His countenance was expressive of great
intelligence, and his carriage was _distingué_; whilst beneath his gold
spectacles there beamed an eye as shrewd as it was penetrating. Although
it was only ten o'clock in the morning, M. de Graün wore a black
coat,--that was etiquette,--and a riband, shot with several bright
colours, was suspended from his buttonhole. He placed his hat on a chair
and took his station near the fireplace, whilst Murphy continued his
work.

"His royal highness, no doubt, was up the best part of the night, my
dear Murphy, for your correspondence appears considerable?"

"Monseigneur went to bed at six o'clock this morning. He wrote, amongst
other letters, one of eight pages to the Grand Marshal, and dictated to
me one equally long to the Chief of the Upper Council, the Prince
Herkhaüsen-Oldenzaal, his royal highness's cousin."

"You know that his son, Prince Henry, has entered as lieutenant in the
guards in the service of his Majesty the Emperor of Austria?"

"Yes; monseigneur recommended him most warmly as his relation; and he
really is a fine, excellent young man, handsome as an angel, and as good
as gold."

"The fact is, my dear Murphy, that if the young Prince Henry had had his
_entrée_ to the grand ducal abbey of Ste. Hermenegilde, of which his
aunt is the superior, the poor nuns--"

"Baron! baron! why--"

"My dear sir, the air of Paris--But let us talk seriously. Shall I await
the rising of his royal highness to communicate all the particulars
which I have procured?"

"No, my dear baron. Monseigneur has desired that he should not be called
before two or three o'clock in the afternoon; he desires, also, that you
send off this morning these despatches by a special courier, instead of
waiting till Monday. You will entrust me with all the particulars you
have acquired, and I will communicate them to monseigneur when he wakes.
These are his orders."

"Nothing can be better, and I think his royal highness will be satisfied
with what I have collected. But, my dear Murphy, I hope the despatch of
the special courier is not a bad sign; the last despatches which I had
the honour of sending to his royal highness--"

"Announced that all was going on well at home; and it is precisely
because my lord is desirous of expressing as early as possible his
entire satisfaction, that he wishes a courier to be despatched this very
day to Prince Herkhaüsen-Oldenzaal, Chief of the Supreme Council."

"That is so like his royal highness; were it to blame instead of
commend, he would observe less haste."

"Nothing new has transpired with us, my dear baron,--nothing at all. Our
mysterious adventures--"

"Are wholly unknown. You know that, since the arrival of his royal
highness in Paris, his friends have become used to see him but little in
public; it is understood that he prefers seclusion, and is in the habit
of making frequent excursions to the environs of Paris, and, with the
exception of the Countess Sarah Macgregor and her brother, no person is
aware of the disguises assumed by his royal highness; and neither of the
personages I have mentioned have the smallest interest in betraying the
secret."

"Ah! my dear baron," exclaimed Murphy, heaving a deep sigh, "what an
unfortunate thing it is that this accursed countess should be left a
widow at this very important moment!"

"She was married, I think, in 1827 or 1828?"

"In 1827, shortly after the death of the unfortunate child, who would
now be in her sixteenth or seventeenth year, and whose loss his royal
highness seems daily more to deplore."

"Far more so, indeed, than he appears to feel for the loss of his
legitimate offspring."

"And thus, my dear baron, we may account for the deep interest his royal
highness takes in the poor Goualeuse, arising as it does from the fact
that the daughter so deeply deplored would, had she lived, have been
precisely the same age as this unfortunate young creature."

"It is, indeed, an unfortunate affair that the Countess Sarah, from whom
we fancied we were for ever freed, should have become a widow exactly
eighteen months after his royal highness had been deprived by death of
the wife with whom he had passed years of wedded happiness. The
countess, I am persuaded, looks upon this double freedom from all
marriage vows as a signal intervention of Providence to further her
views."

"And her impetuous passion has become more ardent than ever, though she
is well aware that my lord feels for her the deepest aversion and
well-merited contempt. Was not her culpable indifference the cause of
her child's death? Did she not cause--Ah, baron," said Murphy, leaving
the sentence unfinished, "this woman is our evil genius. God grant she
may not reappear amongst us laden with fresh misfortunes!"

"But still, under present circumstances, any views Countess Sarah may
entertain must be absurd in the greatest degree; the death of the
unfortunate child you just now alluded to has broken the last tie which
might have attached my lord to this dangerous woman. She must be mad,
as well as foolish, to persist in so hopeless a pursuit."

"If she be mad, there is a dangerous 'method in her madness;' her
brother, you are aware, partakes of her ambitious schemes and obstinate
opinions of ultimate success. Although this worthy pair have as much
reason for utter despair as they had eighteen years since of entire
success--"

"Eighteen years! What an accumulation of evil has been wrought during
that period by the criminal compliance of that rascally Polidori!"

"By the way, talking of that miserable wretch, I have traced that he was
here about a year or two ago, suffering, no doubt, from the most perfect
destitution, or else subsisting by disgraceful and dishonourable
practices."

"What a pity that a man so largely endowed with penetration, talent,
deep learning, and natural intelligence, should sink so low!"

"The innate perversity of his character marred all these high qualities.
It is to be hoped he and the countess will not meet; the junction of two
such evil spirits is indeed to be feared, for what frightful
consequences might there not result from it! Now, touching the facts you
have been collecting, have you them about you?"

"Here," said the baron, drawing a paper from his pocket, "are the
various particulars I have been enabled to collect touching the birth of
a young girl known as La Goualeuse, and also of the now residence of an
individual called François Germain, son of the Schoolmaster."

"Be kind enough to read me the result of your inquiries, my dear De
Graün. I am well aware what are his royal highness's intentions in the
matter; I shall be able to judge then whether the information you
possess will be sufficient to enable him to carry them into effect. You
have every reason to be satisfied with the agent you employ, I suppose?"

"Oh, he is a rare fellow! so precise, methodical, zealous, and
intelligent! I am, indeed, sometimes obliged to moderate his energy; for
I am well aware there are certain points, the clearing up of which his
highness reserves for himself."

"And, of course, your agent is far from suspecting the deep interest his
royal highness has in the matter?"

"Entirely so. My diplomatic position affords an excellent pretext for
the inquiries I have undertaken. M. Badinot (for such is the name of the
person I am speaking of) is a sharp, shrewd individual, having
connections, either recognised or concealed, in every grade of society.
He was formerly a lawyer, but compelled to quit his profession from some
very serious breach of trust; he has, however, retained very accurate
recollections touching the fortunes and situations of his old clients;
he knows many a secret, which he boasts, with considerable effrontery,
of having turned to a good account. By turns, rich and poor,--now
successful, and then a ruined man,--he only ceased his speculations when
none could be found to take part in them with him; reduced to live from
day to day by expedients more or less illegal, he became a curious
specimen of the Figaro school,--so long as his interest was concerned he
would devote himself, soul and body, to his employer; and we are sure of
his fidelity, for the simple reason that he has nothing to gain, though
a great deal to lose, by deceiving us; and, besides, I make him careful
of our interests, even unknown to himself."

"The particulars he has hitherto furnished us with have been very
correct and satisfactory."

"Oh, he has a very straightforward manner of going to work! And I assure
you, my dear Murphy, that M. Badinot is the very original type of one of
those mysterious existences which are to be met with, and only
possible, in Paris. He would greatly amuse his royal highness, if it
were not necessary to avoid their being known to each other in this
business."

"You can augment the pay of M. Badinot if you deem it necessary."

"Why, really, five hundred francs a month, and his expenses, amounting
to nearly the same sum, appear to me quite sufficient; we shall see by
and by."

"And does he not seem ashamed of the part he plays?"

"On the contrary, he is not a little vain of his employment, and when he
brings me any particulars assumes a certain air of importance he would
fain pass off as due to his diplomatic functions; for the fellow either
thinks, or feigns to do so, that he is deeply engaged in state affairs,
and ventures to observe at times, in a sort of undertone, how very
marvellous it is that such close and intimate relationship should be
found to exist between every-day events and the destinies of kingdoms!
Yes, really, he had the impudence to remark to me the other day, 'What
complicated machinery is contained in the grand machine of state
affairs! Who would think now, M. le Baron, those little humble notes
collected by me will have their part to play in directing and regulating
the affairs of Europe!'"

"Yes, yes, rascals generally seek to veil their mean and base practices
beneath some high-sounding pretext. But the notes you are to give me, my
dear baron, have you them with you?"

"Here they are, drawn up precisely from the accounts furnished by M.
Badinot."

"Pray let me hear them; I am all attention."

M. de Graün then read as follows:

"_Note relative to Fleur-de-Marie._--About the beginning of the year
1827, a man named Pierre Tournemine, then under sentence in the galleys
at Rochefort for forgery, proposed to a woman named Gervais, but also
known as La Chouette, to take perpetual charge of a little girl, then
between five and six years of age, for a sum of one thousand francs paid
down.

"The bargain being concluded, the child was delivered over to the woman,
with whom she remained two years, when, unable longer to endure the
cruelty shown her, the little girl disappeared; nor did the Chouette
hear anything of her for several years, when she unexpectedly met with
her at a small public-house in the Cité, nearly seven weeks ago. The
infant, now grown into a young woman, then bore the appellation of La
Goualeuse.

"A few days previously to this meeting, the above mentioned Tournemine,
who had become acquainted with the Schoolmaster at the galleys of
Rochefort, had sent to Bras Rouge (the regular, though concealed
correspondent of every rogue and felon either in prison or out of it) a
lengthened detail of every particular relative to the child formerly
confided to the woman Gervais, otherwise the Chouette.

"From this account, and the declarations of the Chouette, it appeared
that one Madame Séraphin, housekeeper to a notary named Jacques Ferrand,
had in 1827 instructed Tournemine to find a person who, for the sum of
one thousand francs, would be willing to take the entire charge of a
child of from five to six years of age whom it was desired to get rid
of, as has before been mentioned.

"The Chouette accepted the proposition, and received both the child and
the stipulated sum of money.

"The aim of Tournemine, in addressing these particulars to Bras Rouge,
was to enable the latter to extort money from Madame Séraphin, whom
Tournemine considered but as the agent of a third party, under a threat
of revealing the whole affair unless well paid for silence.

"Bras Rouge entrusted the Chouette, long the established partner in all
the Schoolmaster's schemes of villainy; and this explains how so
important a document found its way to that monster's possession, and
also accounts for the expression used by the Chouette at her rencontre
with the Goualeuse in the cabaret of the White Rabbit, when, by way of
tormenting her victim, she said, 'We have found out all about your
parents, but you shall never know who or what they are.'

"The point to be decided was as to the veracity of the circumstances
detailed by Tournemine in his letter to the Chouette.

"It has been ascertained that Madame Séraphin and the notary, Jacques
Ferrand, are both living; the address of the latter is Rue du Sentier,
No. 41, where he passes for a person of pious and austere life; at
least, he is constant in his attendance at church,--his attention to his
professional duties, close and severe, though some accuse him of
following up the severity of the law with unnecessary rigour. In his
mode of living he observes a parsimony bordering on avarice. Madame
Séraphin still resides with him, as manager of his household; and M.
Jacques Ferrand, spite of his original poverty, has invested thirty-five
thousand francs in the funds, the greatest part of this sum having been
supplied to him through a M. Charles Robert, a superior officer of the
National Guard,--a young and handsome man, in high repute with a certain
class of society. 'Tis true that some ill-natured persons are found to
assert that, owing either to fortunate speculations or lucky hits upon
the Stock Exchange, undertaken in partnership with the above mentioned
Charles Robert, the worthy notary could now well afford to pay back the
original loan with high interest; but the rigidly austere and
self-denying life of this worthy man gives a flat denial to all such
gossiping reports, and, spite of the incredulity with which he is
occasionally listened to, he persists in styling himself a man
struggling for a maintenance. There can be no manner of doubt but that
Madame Séraphin, this worthy gentleman's housekeeper, could, if she
pleased, throw an entire light upon every circumstance connected with
La Goualeuse."

"Bravo, my dear baron!" exclaimed Murphy; "nothing can be better. These
declarations of Tournemine carry with them an appearance of truth, and
it seems more than probable that we may, through Jacques Ferrand, obtain
the right clue to discovering the parents of this unfortunate girl. Now
tell me, have you been equally successful in the information collected
touching the son of the Schoolmaster?"

"Perhaps, as regards him, I am not furnished with such minute
particulars; but, upon the whole, I think the result of our inquiries
very satisfactory."

"Upon my word, your M. Badinot is a downright treasure!"

"You see, Bras Rouge is the hinge upon which everything turns. M.
Badinot, who has several acquaintances in the police, pointed him out to
us as the go-between of several notorious felons, and knew the man
directly he was set to discover what had become of the ill-fated son of
Madame Georges Duresnel, the unfortunate wife of this atrocious
Schoolmaster."

"And it was in going to search for Bras Rouge, in his den in the Cité
(Rue aux Fêves, No. 13), that my lord fell in with the Chourineur and La
Goualeuse. His royal highness hoped, too, that the opportunity now
before him, of visiting these abodes of vice and wretchedness, might
afford him the means of rescuing some unfortunate being from the depths
of guilt and misery. His benevolent anticipations were gratified, but at
what risk it is painful even to remember."

"Whatever dangers attended the scheme, you, at least, my dear Murphy,
bravely bore your share in them."

"Was not I, for that very purpose, appointed charcoal-man in waiting
upon his royal highness?" replied the squire, smilingly.

"Say, rather, his intrepid body-guard, my worthy friend. But to touch
upon your courage and devotion is only to repeat what every one knows. I
will, therefore, spare your modesty, and continue my relation. Here are
the various particulars we have been able to glean concerning François
Germain, son of Madame Georges and the Schoolmaster, properly called
Duresnel:

"About eighteen months since, a young man, named François Germain,
arrived in Paris from Nantes, where he had been employed in the
banking-house of Noël and Co.

"It seems, both from the confession of the Schoolmaster as well as from
several letters found upon him, that the scoundrel to whom he had
entrusted his unfortunate offspring, for the purpose of perverting his
young mind, and rendering him one day a worthy assistant to his
unprincipled father in his nefarious schemes, proposed to the young man
to join in a plot for robbing his employers, as well as to forge upon
the firm to a considerable amount. This proposition was received by the
youth with well-merited indignation, but, unwilling to denounce the man
by whom he had been brought up, he first communicated anonymously to his
master the designs projected against the bank, and then privately
quitted Nantes, that he might avoid the rage and fury of those whose
sinful practices his soul sickened and shuddered to think of, far less
to bear the idea of participating in.

"These wretches, aware that they had betrayed themselves to the young
man, and dreading the use he might make of his information, immediately
upon finding he had quitted Nantes followed him to Paris, with the most
sinister intentions of silencing him for ever. After long and
persevering inquiries, they succeeded in discovering his address, but,
happily for the persecuted object of their search, he had a few days
previously encountered the villain who had first sought to corrupt his
principles, and, well divining the motive which had brought him to
Paris, lost no time in changing his abode; and so, for this time, the
Schoolmaster's hapless son escaped his pursuers. Still, however,
following up the scent, they succeeded in tracing the youth to his fresh
abode, 17 Rue du Temple. One evening, however, he narrowly escaped
falling into an ambush laid for him (the Schoolmaster concealed this
circumstance from my lord), but again Providence befriended him, and he
escaped, though too much alarmed to remain in his lodgings; he once more
changed his abode, since which time all traces of him have been lost.
And matters had reached thus far when the Schoolmaster received the just
punishment of his crimes; since which period, by order of my lord, fresh
inquiries have been instituted, of which the following is the result.

"François Germain lived for about three months at No. 17 Rue du Temple,
a house rendered worthy of observation by the habits and ingenious
practices of its inhabitants. Germain was a great favourite among them,
by reason of his kind and amiable disposition, as well as for the frank
gaiety of his temper. Although his means of livelihood appeared very
slender, yet he had rendered the most generous assistance to an indigent
family occupying the garrets of the house. In vain has been every
inquiry made in the Rue du Temple touching the present residence of
François Germain, or the profession he was supposed to follow; every one
in the house believed him to be employed in some counting-house, or
office, as he went out early in the morning and never returned till late
in the evening. The only person who really knows the present residence
of the young man is a female, lodging in the house No. 17 Rue du
Temple,--a young and pretty grisette, named Rigolette, between whom and
Germain a very close acquaintance appears to have existed. She occupies
the adjoining room to that which Germain tenanted, and which chamber, by
the by, is still vacant; and it was under pretext of inquiring about it
that these particulars were obtained."

"Rigolette!" exclaimed Murphy, after having been for several minutes
apparently in deep thought. "Yes, I am sure I know her."

"_You!_ Sir Walter Murphy," replied the baron, much amused. "You, most
worthy and respectable father of a family! _you_ know anything of pretty
grisettes! And so the name of Mlle. Rigolette is familiar to you, is it?
Fie, fie! Oh, positively I am ashamed of you!"

"'Pon my soul, my lord compelled me to have so many strange
acquaintances, that such a mere trifle as this should pass for nothing.
But wait a bit. Yes, now I recollect perfectly, that when my lord was
relating the history of La Goualeuse, I could not help laughing at the
very odd name of Rigolette, which, as far as I can call to mind, was the
name of a prison acquaintance of that poor Fleur-de-Marie."

"Well, then, just at this particular juncture Mlle. Rigolette may be of
the utmost service to us. Let me conclude my report:

"There might possibly be an advantage in engaging the vacant chamber
recently belonging to Germain, in the Rue du Temple. We have no
instructions to proceed further in our investigations, but, from some
words which escaped the porteress, there is every reason to believe that
not only would it be possible to find in this house certain indications
of where the Schoolmaster's son may be heard of, through the means of
Mlle. Rigolette, but the house itself would afford my lord an
opportunity of studying human nature amid wants, difficulties, and
misery, the very existence of which he is far from suspecting."

"Thus you see, my dear Murphy," said M. de Graün, finishing his report
and presenting it to his companion, "you see evidently that it is from
the notary, Jacques Ferrand, we must hope to obtain information
respecting the parentage of La Goualeuse, and that we must go to Mlle.
Rigolette to trace the dwelling of François Germain. It seems to me a
great point to have ascertained the direction in which to search."

"Undoubtedly, baron; you are quite right; and, besides, I am sure my
lord will find a fine field for observation in the house of which you
speak. But I have not yet done with you. Have you made any inquiries
respecting the Marquis d'Harville?"

"I have; and, so far as concerns money matters, his royal highness's
fears are wholly unfounded. M. Badinot affirms (and he is very likely to
be well informed on the subject) that the fortune of the marquis has
never been in a more prosperous condition, or better managed."

"Why, after having in vain exhausted every other conjecture as to the
secret grief which is preying upon M. d'Harville, my lord imagined that
it was just probable the marquis had some pecuniary difficulties; had it
proved so, he would have removed them with that delicate assumption of
mystery you know he so frequently employs to veil his munificence. But,
since even this conjecture has failed, he must abandon all hope of
guessing the enigma; and this he will do the more reluctantly, as his
great desire to discover it arose out of his ardent friendship for M.
d'Harville."

"A friendship which is founded on a grateful recollection of the
important services rendered by the marquis's father to his own parent.
Are you aware, my dear Murphy, that at the remodelling of the States in
1815, at the Germanic confederation, the father of his royal highness
had a chance of being excluded, from his well-known attachment to
Napoleon? Thanks to the friendship with which the Emperor Alexander
honoured him, the deceased Marquis d'Harville was enabled to render most
effectual service to the father of our patron. The emperor, whose warm
regard for the late marquis had taken its date from the period of that
nobleman's emigration to Russia, exerted his powerful influence in
congress so successfully, that at the grand meeting to decide the
destinies of the princes of Germany, the father of our noble employer
was reinstated in all his pristine rights. As for the friendship now
subsisting between the present marquis and his royal highness, I believe
it commenced when, as mere boys, they met together on a visit paid by
the then reigning grand duke to the late Marquis d'Harville."

"So I have heard; and they appear to have retained a most lively
recollection of this happy period of their youth. Nor is this all I have
to say on the subject of the interest our noble master takes in every
matter concerning the house of D'Harville. So profound is his gratitude
for the services rendered to his father, that all bearing the honoured
name of D'Harville, or belonging to the family, possess a powerful claim
on the kindness of the prince. Thus, not alone to her virtues or her
misfortunes does poor Madame Georges owe the increasing and unwearied
goodness of my lord."

"Madame Georges!" exclaimed the astounded baron. "What, the wife of
Duresnel, the felon known as the Schoolmaster?"

"And the mother of François Germain, the youth we are seeking for, and
whom, I trust, we shall find."

"Is the relation of M. d'Harville?"

"She was his mother's cousin, and her most intimate friend; the old
marquis entertained the most perfect friendship and esteem for Madame
Georges."

"But how, for heaven's sake, my dear Murphy, did it ever come about that
the D'Harville family ever permitted a descendant of theirs to marry
such a monster as this Duresnel?"

"Why, thus it was. The father of this unfortunate woman was a M. de
Lagny, who, previous to the Revolution, possessed considerable property
in Languedoc, and who, having fortunately escaped the proscription so
fatal to many, availed himself of the first tranquillity which succeeded
these days of discord and anarchy to establish his only daughter in
marriage. Among the various candidates for the hand of the young heiress
was this Duresnel, the representative of a wealthy and respectable
family, possessing powerful parliamentary influence, and concealing the
depravity of his disposition beneath the most specious exterior. To this
man was Mlle. de Lagny united, by desire of her father; but a very short
time sufficed to strip the mask from his vicious character, and to
display his natural propensities. A gambler, a spendthrift, and
profligate, addicted to the lowest vices that can disgrace a human
being, he quickly dissipated, not only his own fortune, but that of his
wife also. Even the estate to which Madame Georges Duresnel had retired
was involved in the general ruin occasioned by her worthless husband's
passion for play, and his dissolute mode of life; and the unfortunate
woman would have been left without a shelter for herself or infant son
but for the kind affection of her relation, the Marquise d'Harville,
whom she loved with the tenderness of a sister. With this valued friend
Madame Duresnel found a welcome home, while her wretched husband,
finding himself utterly ruined, plunged into the blackest crimes, and
stopped at no means, however guilty and desperate, to supply his
pleasures. He became the associate of thieves, murderers, pickpockets,
and forgers, and ere long, falling into the hands of the law, was
sentenced to the galleys for the term of his natural life. Yet, while
suffering the just punishment of his crimes, his base mind devised the
double atrocity of tearing the child from its miserable mother, for the
sake of breaking down every good principle it might have imbibed, and of
training it up in vicious readiness to join his future schemes of
villainy. You know the rest. After the condemnation of her husband,
Madame Georges, without giving any reason for so doing, quitted the
Marquise d'Harville, and went to hide her shame and her sorrows in
Paris, where she soon fell into the utmost distress. It would occupy
too much time to tell you by what train of events my lord became aware
of the misfortunes of this excellent woman, as well as the ties which
connect her with the D'Harville family; it is sufficient that he came
most opportunely and generously to her assistance, induced her to quit
Paris and establish herself at the farm at Bouqueval, where she now is,
with the Goualeuse. In this peaceful retreat she has found tranquillity,
if not happiness; and the overlooking and management of the farm may
serve to recreate her thoughts, and prevent them from dwelling too
deeply on her past sorrows. As much to spare the almost morbid
sensibility of Madame Georges, as because he dislikes to blazon forth
his good deeds, my lord has not even acquainted M. d'Harville with the
fact of his having relieved his kinswoman from such severe distress."

"I comprehend now the twofold interest which my lord has in desiring to
discover the traces of the son of this poor woman."

"You may also judge by that, my dear baron, of the affection which his
royal highness bears to the whole family, and how deep is his vexation
at seeing the young marquis so sad, with so many reasons to be happy."

"What can there be wanting to M. d'Harville? He unites all,--birth,
fortune, wit, youth; his wife is charming, and as prudent as she is
lovely."

"True, and his royal highness only had recourse to the inquiries we have
been talking over after having in vain endeavoured to penetrate the
cause of M. d'Harville's deep melancholy; he showed himself deeply
affected by the kind attentions of monseigneur, but still has been
entirely reserved on the subject of his low spirits. It may be some
_peine de coeur_."

"Yet it is said that he is excessively fond of his wife, and she does
not give him the least cause for jealousy. I often meet her in society,
and, although she is constantly surrounded by admirers (as every young
and lovely woman is), still her reputation is unsullied."

"The marquis is always speaking of her in the highest terms; he has had,
however, one little discussion with her on the subject of the Countess
Sarah Macgregor."

"Has she, then, seen her?"

"By a most unlucky chance, the father of the Marquis d'Harville knew
Sarah Seyton of Halsburg, and her brother Tom, seventeen or eighteen
years ago, during their residence in Paris, and when they were much
noticed by the lady of the English ambassador. Learning that the brother
and sister were going into Germany, the old marquis gave them letters of
introduction to the father of our noble lord, with whom he kept up a
constant correspondence. Alas! my dear De Graün, perhaps but for these
introductions many misfortunes would have been avoided, for then
monseigneur would not have known this woman. When the Countess Sarah
returned hither, knowing the friendship of his royal highness for the
marquis, she presented herself at the Hotel d'Harville, in the hope of
meeting monseigneur; for she shows as much pertinacity in pursuing him
as he evinces resolution to avoid her."

"Only imagine her disguising herself in male attire, and following him
into the Cité! No woman but she would have dreamt of such a thing."

"She, perhaps, hoped by such a step to touch his royal highness and
compel him to an interview, which he has always refused and avoided. To
return to Madame d'Harville: her husband, to whom monseigneur has spoken
of Sarah as she deserved, has begged his wife to see her as seldom as
possible; but the young marquise, seduced by the hypocritical flatteries
of the countess, has gone somewhat counter to the marquis's request.
Some trifling differences have arisen, but not of sufficient importance
to cause or explain the extreme dejection of the marquis."

"Oh, the women! the women! My dear Murphy, I am very sorry that Madame
d'Harville should have formed any acquaintance with this Sarah. So young
and charming a woman must suffer by the contact with such an infernal--"

"Talking of infernal creatures," said Murphy, "here is a communication
relative to Cecily, the unworthy spouse of the excellent David."

"Between ourselves, my dear Murphy, this audacious _métisse_[9] well
deserves the terrible punishment that her husband, our dear black
doctor, has inflicted on the Schoolmaster by monseigneur's order. She
has also shed blood, and her unblushing infamy is astounding."

  [9] The Creole issue of a white and quadroon slave. The
  _métisses_ only differ from the whites by some peculiarities
  hardly perceptible.

"Yet she is so very handsome,--so seductive! A perverted mind within an
attractive outside always inspires me with twofold disgust."

"In this sense Cecily is doubly hateful. But I hope that this despatch
annuls the last orders issued by monseigneur with regard to this
wretched creature."

"On the contrary, baron."

"My lord, then, desires that her escape from the fortress in which she
had been shut up for life may be effected?"

"Yes."

"And that her pretended ravisher should bring her to France,--to Paris?"

"Yes; and, besides, this despatch orders the arrangement to be carried
out as soon as possible, and that Cecily be made to travel hither so
speedily that she may arrive here in a fortnight."

"I am lost in astonishment! Monseigneur has always evinced such a horror
of her!"

"And that horror he still experiences; if possible, stronger than ever."

"And yet he causes her to be sent to him! To be sure, it will always be
easy to apprehend Cecily again, if she does not carry out what he
requires of her. Orders are given to the son of the gaoler of the
fortress of Gerolstein to carry her off, as if he were enamoured of her,
and every facility will be given to him for effecting this purpose.
Overjoyed at this opportunity of escaping, the _métisse_ will follow her
supposed ravisher, and reach Paris; then she will always have her
sentence of condemnation hanging over her, always be but an escaped
prisoner, and I shall be always ready, when it shall please his royal
highness to desire, again to lay hands upon and incarcerate her."

"I should tell you, my dear baron, that when David learned from
monseigneur of the proposed arrival of Cecily, he was absolutely
petrified, and exclaimed, 'I hope that your royal highness will not
compel me to see the monster?' 'Make yourself easy,' replied
monseigneur; 'you shall not see her, but I may require her services for
a particular purpose.' David felt relieved of an enormous weight off his
mind. Nevertheless, I am sure that some very painful reminiscences were
awakened in his mind."

"Poor negro! he loves her still. They say, too, that she is yet so
lovely!"

"Charming!--too charming! It requires the pitiless eye of a creole to
detect the mixed blood in the all but imperceptible shade which lightly
tinges her rosy finger-nails. Our fresh and hale beauties of the North
have not a more transparent complexion, nor a skin of more dazzling
whiteness."

"I was in France when monseigneur returned from America, accompanied by
David and Cecily, and I know that that excellent man was from that time
attached to his royal highness by ties of the strongest gratitude; but I
never learned how he became attached to the service of our master, and
how he had married Cecily, whom I saw, for the first time, about a year
after his marriage; and God knows the scandal that followed!"

"I can tell you every particular that you may wish to learn, my dear
baron; I accompanied monseigneur in his voyage to America, when he
rescued David and the _métisse_ from the most awful fate."

"You are always most kind, my dear Murphy, and I am all attention," said
the baron.




CHAPTER XXII.

HISTORY OF DAVID AND CECILY.


"Mr. Willis, a rich American planter, settled in Florida," said Murphy,
"had discovered in one of his young black slaves, named David, who was
employed in the infirmary attached to his dwelling, a very remarkable
degree of intelligence, combined with a constant and deep commiseration
for the sick poor, to whom he gave, with the utmost attention and care,
the medicine ordered by the doctors, and, moreover, so strong a
prepossession for the study of botany, as applied to medicine, that
without any tuition he had composed and classified a sort of flora of
the plants around the dwelling and the vicinity. The establishment of
Mr. Willis, situated on the borders of the sea, was fifteen or twenty
leagues from the nearest town; and the medical men of the district,
ignorant as they were, gave themselves no great deal of care or trouble,
in consequence of the long distance and the difficulty in procuring any
means of conveyance. Desirous of remedying so extreme an inconvenience
in a country subject to violent epidemics, and to have at hand at all
times a skilful practitioner, the colonist made up his mind to send
David to France to learn surgery and medicine. Enchanted at this offer,
the young black set out for Paris, and the planter paid all the expenses
of his course of study. David, having for eight years studied with great
diligence and remarkable effect, received the degree of surgeon and
physician with the most distinguished success, and then returned to
America to place himself and his skill under the direction of his
master."

"But David ought to have considered himself free and emancipated, in
fact and in law, when he set foot in France."

"David's loyalty is very rare: he had promised Mr. Willis to return, and
he did so. He did not consider as his own the instruction which he had
acquired with his master's money; and, besides, he hoped to improve
morally as well as physically the sufferings of the slaves, his former
companions; he trusted to become not only their doctor, but their firm
friend and defender with the colonist."

"He must, indeed, be imbued with the most unflinching probity and the
most intense love for his fellow creatures to return to a master,--an
owner,--after having spent eight years in the midst of the society of
the most democratic young men in Europe."

"Judge of the man by this one trait. Well, he returned to Florida, and,
truth to tell, was used by Mr. Willis with consideration and kindness,
eating at his table, sleeping under his roof. But this colonist was as
stupid, malevolent, selfish, and despotic as most creoles are, and he
thought himself very generous in giving David six hundred francs
(24_l._) a year salary. At the end of some months a terrible typhus
fever broke out in the plantation. Mr. Willis was attacked by it, but
soon restored through the careful attentions and efficacious remedies of
David. Out of thirty negroes dangerously affected by this fatal disease,
only two perished. Mr. Willis, much gratified by the services which
David had so auspiciously rendered, raised his wages to twelve hundred
francs, to the extreme gratification of the black doctor, whose fellows
regarded him as a divinity amongst them, for he had, with much
difficulty it is true, obtained from their master some few indulgences,
and was hoping to procure still more. In the meanwhile, he consoled
these poor people, and exhorted them to patience; spake to them of God,
who watches over the black and the white man with an equal eye; of
another world not peopled with masters and slaves, but with the just and
the unjust; of another life in eternity, where man was no longer the
beast of burden,--the property,--the thing of his fellow man, but where
the victims of this world were so happy that they prayed in heaven for
their tormentors. What shall I tell you more? To those unhappy wretches
who, contrary to other men, count with bitter joy the hours which bring
them nearer to the tomb,--to those unfortunate creatures, who looked
forward only to nothingness hereafter, David breathed the language and
the hope of a free and happy immortality; and then their chains appeared
less heavy and their toil less irksome. He was their idol. A year passed
away in this manner. Amongst the handsomest of the female slaves at the
house was a _métisse_, about fifteen years of age, named Cecily, and for
this poor girl Mr. Willis took a fancy. For the first time in his life
his advances were repulsed and obstinately resisted; Cecily was in love,
and with David, who, during the late fearful distemper, had attended her
with the most vigilant care. Afterwards a deep and mutual love repaid
him the debt of gratitude. David's taste was too refined to allow him to
boast of his happiness before the time when he should marry Cecily,
which was to be when she had turned her sixteenth year. Mr. Willis,
ignorant of their love, had thrown his handkerchief right royally at the
pretty _métisse_, and she, in deep despair, sought David, and told him
all the brutal attempts that she had been subjected to and with
difficulty escaped. The black comforted her, and instantly went to Mr.
Willis to request her hand in marriage."

"_Diable!_ my dear Murphy, I can easily surmise the answer of the
American sultan,--he refused?"

"He did. He said he had an inclination for the girl himself; that in
his life before he had never experienced the repulse of a slave; he
meant to possess her, and he would. David might choose another wife or
mistress, whichsoever might best suit his inclination; there were in the
plantation ten _capusses_ or _métisses_ as pretty as Cecily. David
talked of his love,--love so long and tenderly shared, and the planter
shrugged his shoulders; David urged, but it was all in vain. The creole
had the cool impudence to tell him that it was a bad 'example' to see a
master concede to a slave, and that he would not set that 'example' to
satisfy a caprice of David's! He entreated,--supplicated, and his master
lost his temper. David, blushing to humiliate himself further, spake in
a firm tone of his services and disinterestedness,--that he had been
contented with a very slender salary. Mr. Willis was desperately
enraged, and, telling him he was a contumacious slave, threatened him
with the chain. David replied with a few bitter and violent words; and,
two hours afterwards, bound to a stake, his skin was torn with the lash,
whilst they bore Cecily to the harem of the planter in his sight."

"The conduct of the planter was brutal and horrible; it was adding
absurdity to cruelty, for he must after that have required the man's
services."

"Precisely so; for that very day the very fury into which he had worked
himself, joined to the drunkenness in which the brute indulged every
evening, brought on an inflammatory attack of the most dangerous
description, the symptoms of which appeared with the rapidity peculiar
to such affections. The planter was carried to his bed in a state of the
highest fever. He sent off an express for a doctor, but he could not
reach his abode in less than six and thirty hours."

"Really, this attack seems providential. The desperate condition of the
man was quite deserved by him."

"The malady made fearful strides. David only could save the colonist,
but Willis, distrustful, as all evil-doers are, imagined that the black
would revenge himself by administering poison; for, after having
scourged him with a rod, he had thrown him into prison. At last,
horrified at the progress of his illness, broken down by bodily anguish,
and thinking that, as death also stared him in the face, he had one
chance left in trusting to the generosity of his slave, after many
distrusting doubts, Willis ordered David to be unchained."

"And David saved the planter?"

"For five days and five nights he watched and tended him as if he had
been his father, counteracting the disease, step by step, with great
skill and perfect knowledge, until, at last, he succeeded in defeating
it, to the extreme surprise of the doctor who had been sent for, and who
did not arrive until the second day."

"And, when restored to health at last, the colonist--"

"Not desiring to blush before his own slave, whose presence constantly
oppressed him with the recollection of his excessive nobleness of
conduct, the colonist made an enormous sacrifice to attach the doctor he
had sent for to his establishment, and David was again conducted to his
dungeon."

"Horrible, but by no means astonishing. David must have been in the eyes
of his brutal master a complete living remorse."

"Such conduct was dictated alike by revenge and jealousy. The blacks of
Mr. Willis loved David with all the warmth of gratitude, for he had
saved them body and soul. They knew the care he had bestowed on him when
he lay tossing with fever between life and death, and, shaking off the
deadening apathy which ordinarily besets slavery, these unfortunate
creatures evinced their indignation, or rather grief, most powerfully
when they saw David lacerated by the whip. Mr. Willis, deeply
exasperated, affected to discover in this manifestation the appearance
of revolt, and, when he considered the influence which David had
acquired over the slaves, he believed him capable of placing himself at
the head of a rebellion to avenge himself of his wrongs. This fear was
another motive with the colonist for using David in the most shameful
manner, and entirely preventing him from effecting the malicious designs
of which he suspected him."

"Considering him as actuated by an irrepressible amount of terror, this
conduct seems less stupid, but quite as ferocious."

"A short time after these events we arrived in America. Monseigneur had
freighted a Danish brig at St. Thomas's, and we visited incognito all
the settlements of the American coast along which we were sailing. We
were most hospitably received by Mr. Willis, who, the evening after our
arrival, after he had been drinking, and as much from the excitement of
wine as from a desire to boast, told us, in a horrid tone of brutal
jesting, the history of David and Cecily. I forgot to say that, after
having maltreated the girl, he had thrown her into a dungeon also, as a
punishment for her disdain of him. His royal highness, on hearing
Willis's fearful narration, thought the man was either drunk or a liar;
but he was drunk,--it was no lie. To remove any and all doubt, the
colonist rose from the table, and desired a slave to bear a lantern and
conduct us to David's cell."

"Well, what followed?"

"In my life I never saw so distressing a spectacle. Pale, wan, meagre,
half naked, and covered with wounds, David and the unhappy girl, chained
by the middle of the body, one at one end and the other at the other end
of the dungeon, looked like spectres. The lantern that lighted us threw
over this scene a still more ghastly hue. David did not utter a word
when he saw us; his gaze was fixed and fearful. The colonist said to
him, with cruel irony, 'Well, doctor, how goes it? You, who are so
clever, why don't you cure yourself?' The black replied by a noble word
and a dignified gesture; he raised his right hand slowly, his forefinger
pointed to the roof, and, without looking at the colonist, said in a
solemn tone, 'God!' and then was silent. 'God?' replied the planter,
bursting into a loud fit of laughter, 'tell him, then,--tell God to come
and snatch you from my power! I defy him!' Then Willis, overcome by fury
and intoxication, shook his fist to heaven, and said, in blasphemous
language, 'Yes, I defy God to carry off my slaves before they are
dead!'"

"The man was mad as well as brutal."

"We were utterly disgusted. Monseigneur did not say a word, and we left
the cell. This dungeon was situated, as well as the house, on the
seashore. We returned to our brig, which was moored a short distance
off, and at one o'clock in the morning, when all in the building were
plunged in profound sleep, monseigneur went on shore with eight men well
armed, and, going straight to the prison, burst open the doors, and
freed David and Cecily. The two victims were carried on board so quietly
that they were not perceived; and then monseigneur and I went to the
planter's house. Strange contrast! These men torture their slaves, and
yet do not take any precaution against them, but sleep with doors and
windows open. We easily got access to the sleeping-room of the planter,
which was lighted on the inside by a small glass lamp. Monseigneur
awakened the man, who sat upright in his bed, his brain still disturbed
by the effect of his drunkenness. 'You have to-night defied God to carry
off your two victims before their death, and he has taken them,' said
monseigneur. Then taking a bag which I carried, and which contained
twenty-five thousand francs in gold, he threw it on the fellow's bed,
and added, 'This will indemnify you for the loss of your two slaves,--to
your violence that destroys I oppose a violence that saves. God will
judge between us.' We then retreated, leaving Mr. Willis stupefied,
motionless, and believing himself under the influence of a dream. A few
minutes later we were again on board the brig, which instantly set
sail."

"It appears to me, my dear Murphy, that his royal highness overpaid this
wretch for the loss of his slaves; for, in fact, David no longer
belonged to him."

"We calculated, as nearly as we could, the expense which his studies had
cost for eight years, and then the price, thrice over, of himself and
Cecily as slaves. Our conduct was contrary to the rights of property, I
know; but if you had seen in what a horrible state we found this
unfortunate and half-dead couple, if you had heard the sacrilegious
defiance almost cast in the face of the Almighty by this man, drunk with
wine and ferocity, you would comprehend how monseigneur desired, as he
said, on this occasion to act as it were in behalf of Providence."

"All this is as assailable and as justifiable as the punishment of the
Schoolmaster, my worthy squire. And had not this adventure any
consequences?"

"It could not. The brig was under Danish colours; the incognito of his
royal highness was closely kept; we were taken for rich Englishmen. To
whom could Willis have addressed his complaints, if he had any to make?
In fact, he had told us himself, and the medical man of monseigneur
declared it in a _procès verbal_, that the two slaves could not have
lived eight days longer in this frightful dungeon. It required the
greatest possible care to snatch David and Cecily from almost certain
death. At last they were restored to life. From this period David has
been attached to the suite of monseigneur as a medical man, and is most
devotedly attached to him."

"David married Cecily, of course, on arriving in Europe?"

"This marriage, which ought to have been followed by results so happy,
took place in the chapel of the palace of monseigneur; but, by a most
extraordinary revulsion of conduct, hardly was she in the full enjoyment
of an unhoped-for position, when, forgetting all that David had suffered
for her and what she had suffered for him, blushing in the new world to
be wedded to a black, Cecily, seduced by a man of most depraved morals,
committed her first fault. It would seem as though the natural
perversity of this abandoned woman, having till then slumbered, was
suddenly awakened, and developed itself with fearful energy. You know
the rest, and all the scandal of the adventures that followed. After
having been two years a wife, David, whose confidence in her was only
equalled by his love, learned the full extent of her infamy,--a
thunderbolt aroused him from his blind security."

"They say he tried to kill his wife."

"Yes; but, through the interference of monseigneur, he consented to
allow her to be immured for life in a prison, and it is thence that
monseigneur now seeks to have her released,--to your great astonishment,
as well as mine, my dear baron. But it is growing late, and his royal
highness is anxious that your courier should start for Gerolstein with
as little delay as possible."

"In two hours' time he shall be on the road. So now, my dear Murphy,
farewell till the evening."

"Till the evening, adieu."

"Have you, then, forgotten that there is a grand ball at the ----
Embassy, and that his royal highness will be present?"

"True. I have always forgotten that, since the absence of Colonel Verner
and the Count d'Harneim, I have the honour to fulfil the functions of
chamberlain and aide-de-camp."

"Ah, apropos of the count and the colonel, when may we expect their
return? Will they have soon completed their respective missions?"

"You know that monseigneur will keep them away as long as possible,
that he may enjoy more solitude and liberty. As to the errand on which
his royal highness has employed each of them, as an ostensible motive
for getting rid of them in a quiet way,--sending one to Avignon and the
other to Strasbourg,--I will tell you all about it some day, when we are
both in a dull mood; for I will defy the most hypochondriacal person in
existence not to burst with laughter at the narrative, as well as with
certain passages in the despatches of these worthy gentlemen, who have
assumed their pretended missions with so serious an air."

"To tell the truth, I have never clearly understood why his royal
highness attached the colonel and the count to his private person."

"Why, my dear fellow, is not Colonel Verner the accurate type of
military perfection? Is there, in the whole Germanic confederation, a
more elegant figure, more flourishing and splendid moustaches, and a
more complete military figure? And when he is fully decorated, screwed
in, uniformed, gold-laced, plumed, etc., etc., it is impossible to see a
more glorious, self-satisfied, proud, handsome--animal."

"True, but it is his very good looks that prevent him from having the
appearance of a man of refined and acute intellect."

"Well! and monseigneur says that, thanks to the colonel, he is in the
habit of finding even the dullest people in the world bearable. Before
certain audiences, which are of necessity, he shuts himself up with the
colonel for a half-hour or so, and then leaves him, full of spirits and
light as air, quite ready to meet bores and defy them."

"Just as the Roman soldier who, before a forced march, used to sole his
sandals with lead, and so found all fatigue light by leaving them off. I
now discover the usefulness of the colonel. But the Count d'Harneim?"

"Is also very serviceable to our dear lord; for, always hearing at his
side the tinkling of this old cracked bell, shining and
chattering,--continually seeing this soap-bubble so puffed up with
nothingness, so magnificently variegated, and, as such, portraying the
theatrical and puerile phase of sovereign power,--his royal highness
feels the more sensibly the vanity of those barren pomps and glories of
the world, and, by contrast, has often derived the most serious and
happy ideas from the contemplation of his useless and pattering
chamberlain."

"Well, well; but let us be just, my dear Murphy: tell me, in what court
in the world would you find a more perfect model of a chamberlain? Who
knows better than dear old D'Harneim the numberless rules and strict
observances of etiquette? Who bears with more becoming demeanour an
enamelled cross around his neck, or more majestically comports himself
when the keys of office are suspended from his shoulders?"

"Apropos, baron; monseigneur declares that the shoulders of a
chamberlain have a peculiar physiognomy: that is, he says, an appearance
at once constrained and repulsive, which it is painful to look at; for,
alas and alackaday! it is at the back of a chamberlain that the symbol
of his office glitters, and, as monseigneur avers, the worthy D'Harneim
always seems tempted to present himself backwards, that his importance
may at once be seen, felt, and acknowledged."

"The fact is, that the incessant subject of the count's meditations is
to ascertain by what fatal imagination and direction the chamberlain's
key has been placed behind the chamberlain's back; for it is related of
him that he said, with his accustomed good sense, and with a kind of
bitter grief, 'What, the devil! one does not open a door with one's
back, at all events!'"

"Baron, the courier! the courier!" said Murphy, pointing to the clock.

"Sad old reprobate, to make me chatter thus! It is your fault. Present
my respects to his royal highness," said M. de Graün, taking his hat up
in haste. "And now, adieu till the evening, my dear Murphy."

"Till the evening, my dear baron, fare thee well. It will be late before
we meet, for I am sure that monseigneur will go this very day to pay a
visit to the mysterious house in the Rue du Temple."




CHAPTER XXIII.

A HOUSE IN THE RUE DU TEMPLE.


In order to profit by the particulars furnished by Baron de Graün
respecting La Goualeuse and Germain, the Schoolmaster's son, it became
necessary for Rodolph to visit the house in the Rue du Temple, formerly
the abode of that young man, whose retreat the prince likewise hoped to
discover through the intervention of Mlle. Rigolette. Although prepared
to find it a difficult task, inasmuch as it was more than probable, if
the grisette were really sufficiently in Germain's confidence to be
aware of his present abode, she also knew too well his anxiety to
conceal it to be likely to give the desired information.

By renting the chamber lately occupied by the young man, Rodolph,
besides being on the spot to follow up his researches, considered he
should also be enabled to observe closely the different individuals
inhabiting the rest of the house.

The same day on which the conversation passed between the Baron de Graün
and Murphy, Rodolph, plainly and unpretendingly dressed, wended his way
about three o'clock, on a gloomy November afternoon, towards the Rue du
Temple.

Situated in a district of much business and dense population, the house
in question had nothing remarkable in its appearance; it was composed of
a ground floor, occupied by a man keeping a low sort of dram-shop, and
four upper stories, surmounted by attics. A dark and narrow alley led
to a small yard, or, rather, a species of square well, of about five or
six feet in width, completely destitute of either air or light, and
serving as a pestilential receptacle for all the filth thrown by the
various occupants of the respective chambers from the unglazed sashes
with which each landing-place was provided.

At the bottom of a damp, dismal-looking staircase, a glimmering light
indicated the porter's residence, rendered smoky and dingy by the
constant burning of a lamp, requisite, even at midday, to enlighten the
gloomy hole, into which Rodolph entered for the purpose of asking leave
to view the apartment then vacant.

A lamp, placed behind a glass globe filled with water, served as a
reflector; and by its light might be seen, at the far end of the "lodge"
(as in courtesy it was styled), a bed, covered with a sort of patchwork
counterpane, exhibiting a mingled mass of every known colour and
material. A walnut-tree table graced the side of the room, bearing a
variety of articles suited to the taste and ornamental notions of its
owners. First in order appeared a little waxen Saint John, with a very
fat lamb at his feet, and a large peruke of flowing white curls on his
head, the whole enclosed in a cracked glass case, the joinings of which
were ingeniously secured by slips of blue paper; secondly, a pair of old
plated candlesticks, tarnished by time, and bearing, instead of lights,
two gilded oranges,--doubtless an offering to the porteress on the last
New Year's day; and, thirdly, two boxes, the one composed of variegated
straw, the other covered with multitudinous shells, but both smelling
strongly of the galleys or house of correction[10] (let us hope, for the
sake of the morality of the porteress in the Rue du Temple, that these
precious specimens were not presented to her from the original owners
and fabricators of them); and, lastly, between the two boxes, and just
beneath a circular clock, was suspended a pair of red morocco
dress-boots, small enough for the feet of fairies, but elaborately and
skilfully designed and completed. This _chef-d'oeuvre_, as the ancient
masters of the craft would style them, joined to the fantastic designs
sketched on the walls representing boots and shoes, abundantly indicated
that the porter of this establishment devoted his time and his talents
to the repairing of shoes and shoe leather.

  [10] These boxes were the exclusive manufacture of the criminals
  confined either in the galleys or prisons, and who spent nearly
  all their spare hours in making them.

At the instant when Rodolph ventured into the smoky den, M. Pipelet, the
porter, temporarily absent, had left his better half, Madame Pipelet, as
his representative. This individual was seated by the stove in the
centre of the lodge, deeply engrossed in watching the boiling of a pot
placed over it. The description of Madame Pipelet may be given in a few
words. She was the most ugly, forbidding, wrinkled, toothless old hag
one might meet in the course of a long life. Her dress was dirty,
tawdry, and untidy; while her head-dress was composed of a Brutus wig,
originally of a blond colour, but changed by time into every shade of
red, brown, and yellow, the stiff ends of the perished hair standing out
like the ears of wheat in a wheat-sheaf. Much did Madame Pipelet pride
herself upon this tasteful covering to her sexagenarian skull; nor was
it believed she ever laid it aside, whether sleeping or waking.

At the sight of Rodolph the porteress inquired, in a surly tone:

"Well, and pray what do you want?"

"I believe, madame," replied Rodolph, laying a profound emphasis on the
word madame, "I believe there is an apartment to be let in this house?"

The deep respect implied in his voice and words somewhat mollified the
porteress, who answered, rather less sourly:

[Illustration: "_This Individual Was Seated by the Stove_"
Original Etching by Adrian Marcel]

"Yes, there is a room to let on the fourth floor, but you cannot see it
now,--Alfred has gone out."

"You are speaking of your son, I presume, madame; may I take the liberty
of asking whether he is expected in shortly?"

"I am not speaking of my son, but my husband. I suppose there is no act
of parliament why my Pipelet should not be called 'Alfred.' Is there,
pray?"

"None, certainly, madame, that I am aware of; but, with your kind
permission, I will await his return. I am very desirous of taking the
vacant chamber,--both the street and neighbourhood suit me; and the
admirable order in which the house seems kept pleases me excessively.
But, previously to viewing the lodging I am anxious to take, I should be
very glad to ascertain whether you, madame, could do me the favour to
take the management of my little housekeeping off my hands? I never like
to have any one about me but the authorised housekeeper belonging to the
house, when such arrangements meet with their approbation."

This proposition, so flatteringly expressed, and the word "housekeeper"
completely won Madame Pipelet, who replied:

"With the greatest of pleasure, sir, I will attend to all you require. I
am sure I shall be proud to wait upon such a gentleman; and, for the
small charge of six francs a month, you shall be treated like a prince."

"Then for six francs a month, I may reckon upon your valuable services.
Will you permit me to ask your name?"

"Pomona Fortunata Anastasia Pipelet."

"Well, then, Madame Pipelet, having agreed as to your own terms, will
you be pleased to tell me those for the apartment I wish to engage?"

"With the adjoining small closet, one hundred and fifty francs a
month,--not a farthing less. The principal lessee is a screw,--a regular
skinflint."

"What is his name?"

"M. Bras Rouge."

This name, and the remembrances so unexpectedly presented by it, made
Rodolph start.

"I think, Madame Pipelet, you were saying that the principal lessee of
the house is----"

"M. Bras Rouge."

"And he lives----"

"Rue aux Fêves, No. 13. He also keeps an estaminet near the Champs
Elysées."

All doubt was then at an end,--it was the Bras Rouge of infamous
notoriety; and singular indeed did the circumstance of thus coming
across him strike Rodolph.

"But though M. Bras Rouge is your principal lessee, he is not, I
presume, the owner of the house; may I ask who is?"

"M. Bourdon; but I have never had communication with any one besides M.
Bras Rouge."

With the design of still further ingratiating himself with the
porteress, Rodolph resumed:

"My dear madame, this cold day would make a little of something warm and
comfortable very acceptable. Might I venture to solicit the favour of
your stepping as far as the spirit-shop, kept so conveniently at hand,
and bring a bottle of cassia and two glasses? For I feel very tired, and
the cold has quite seized me. Stay, madame, we will have three glasses,
if you please; because I hope your husband will join us when he
returns."

So saying, he placed a franc in the fat, dirty hand of the porteress.

"Ah, monsieur, you are determined to make us all fall in love with you!"
cried Madame Pipelet, nodding her approval of the commission, and
thereby sending the flush of pleasure into a face glowing with all the
fiery honours of an excited Bacchante.

"To be sure! There is nothing like a drop of really good cordial such a
day as this; and they do keep most excellent here at hand. I'll go,--of
course I will; but I shall only bring a couple of glasses, for Alfred
and I always drink out of the same glass. Poor old darling! he is so
very nice and particular in showing all those sort of delicate
attentions to women."

"Then go along, my good Madame Pipelet, and we will wait till Alfred
comes."

"But, then, suppose any one wants me whilst I am out, who will mind the
lodge?"

"Oh, I'll take care of the lodge."

The old woman departed on her agreeable errand.

At the termination of a few minutes the postman tapped at the lodge
window, and putting his hand into the apartment, presented two letters,
merely saying, "Three sous."

"Six sous, you mean, for two letters," replied Rodolph.

"One is free," answered the man.

Having paid and dismissed the postman, Rodolph mechanically examined the
two letters thus committed to his charge; but at a further glance they
seemed to him worthy a more attentive observation. The epistle addressed
to Madame Pipelet exhaled through its hot-pressed envelope a strong
odour of Russia leather; it bore, on a seal of red wax, the initials "C.
R." surmounted by a helmet, and supported by a cross of the Legion of
Honour. The direction was written in a firm, bold hand. The heraldic
device of the commingled casque and cross made Rodolph smile, and
confirmed him in the idea that the writer of the letter in question was
not a female. Who was this scented, emblazoned correspondent of old
Anastasia Pipelet? Rodolph felt an undefinable curiosity to know. The
other epistle, written upon coarse and common paper, was united only by
a common wafer, pricked over with the point of a pin, and was addressed
to "M. César Bradamanti, Operating Dentist." Evidently disguised, the
superscription was entirely composed of capital letters. Whether founded
on a true or false presage, this letter seemed to Rodolph to wear a
mournful look, as though evil or misery were contained within its shabby
folds. He perceived that some of the letters in the direction were
fainter than the others, and that the paper there seemed a little
rumpled: a tear had evidently fallen upon it.

Madame Pipelet returned, bearing the bottle of cassia and two glasses.

"I have dawdled,--have I not, monsieur?" said she, gaily. "But let you
once get into that good Père Joseph's shop, and it is hard work to get
out again. Oh, that old man is a very insinuating----"

"Here, madame," interrupted Rodolph, "here are two letters the postman
left while you were gone."

"Dear me! Two letters! Pray excuse me, monsieur. I suppose you paid for
them?"

"I did."

"You are very good. I tell you what, then, we will settle that out of
the first money you have to pay me; how much was it?"

"Three sous," answered Rodolph, much amused at the ingenious method of
reimbursement employed by Madame Pipelet. "But may I, without offence,
observe that one of the letters is addressed to you, and that you
possess in the writer a correspondent whose _billets-doux_ are
marvellously well perfumed?"

"Let us see what it is about," said the porteress, taking the epistle in
the scented envelope. "Yes, upon my word, it is scented up like a real
_billet-doux_! Now, I should very much like to know who would dare write
_me_ a love-letter! He must be a villain!"

"And suppose it had fallen into your husband's hands, Madame Pipelet?"

"Oh, for goodness' sake don't mention that, or I shall faint away in
your arms! But how stupid I am! Now I know all about it," replied the
fat porteress, shrugging her shoulders. "To be sure! to be sure! it
comes from the Commandant! Lord bless me, what a fright I have had! for
Alfred is as jealous as a Turk."

"Here is another letter addressed to M. César Bradamanti."

"Ah! to be sure, the dentist on the third floor. I will put it in the
letter-boot."

Rodolph fancied he had not caught the right words, but, to his
astonishment, he saw Madame Pipelet gravely throw the letter alluded to
into an old top-boot hanging up against the wall. He looked at her with
surprise.

"Do you mean," said he at length, "to put the gentleman's letter in----"

"Oh, yes, that is all right," replied the porteress. "I have put it in
the letter-boot,--there, you see. So now nobody's letters can be
mislaid; and when the different lodgers return home, Alfred or myself
turns the boot upside down,--we sort them out, and everybody gets his
own."

So saying, the porteress proceeded to break the seal of the letter
addressed to her; which having done, she turned it round and round,
looked at it in every direction, then, after a short appearance of
embarrassment and uncertainty, she said to Rodolph:

"Alfred generally reads my letters for me, because I do not happen to be
able to read them myself; perhaps you would not mind just looking over
this for me?"

"With the utmost pleasure!" quickly replied Rodolph, curious to dive
into the mysteries of who Madame Pipelet's correspondent might be; and
forthwith he read what follows, written upon hot-pressed paper, stamped
in its right-hand corner with the helmet, the letters "C. R.," the
heraldic supporters, and the cross of honour.

      "To-morrow (Friday), about eleven o'clock, let there be a good
    (not an overfierce) fire lighted in both rooms; have everything
    well dusted, and remove the coverings from the furniture, taking
    especial care not to scratch the gilding, or to soil or burn the
    carpet while lighting the fires. If I should not be in about one
    o'clock, when a lady will arrive in a hackney-coach and inquire
    for me by the name of M. Charles, let her be shown up to the
    apartment; after which the key is to be taken down-stairs again,
    and kept till my arrival."

Spite of the want of finished composition displayed in this _billet_,
Rodolph perfectly comprehended to whom and what it alluded, and merely
added, after perusing it:

"Who lives on the first floor, then?"

The old woman placed her yellow, shrivelled finger upon her pendulous
lip, and replied, by a half-malicious grin:

"Hush! There is a woman in the way,--silence!"

"Oh, my dear Madame Pipelet, I merely asked because, before living in a
house, one likes to know a little."

"Yes, yes! Of course, everybody likes to know all they can; that is all
fair enough; and I am sure I have no objection to tell you all I know
myself, and that is but very little. Well, but to begin. About six weeks
ago a carpet-maker came here to look at the first floor, which was then
to let, and to ask the price, and other particulars about it. Next day
he came again, accompanied by a young man of fair complexion, small
moustaches, and wearing a cross of honour and very fine linen. The
carpet-maker called him commandant."

"A military man, I suppose?" said Rodolph.

"Military!" exclaimed Madame Pipelet, with a chuckle. "Not he! Why,
Alfred might as well call himself porter to a prince."

"How so?"

"Why, he is only in the National Guard! The carpet-maker only called him
commandant to flatter him: just the same as it tickles up Alfred's
vanity to be styled _concierge_ instead of porter. So when the
commandant (that is the only name we know him by) had looked over the
rooms, he said to the upholsterer, his friend, 'Well, I think the place
will do for me,--just see the landlord, and arrange all about it.' 'Yes,
commandant,' says the other. And the very next day the upholsterer-man
signed the lease with M. Bras Rouge (in his own name, mind you); and,
further, paid six months in advance, because, he said, the gentleman did
not wish to be bored about references. And such a power of fine
furniture as was sent into the first floor! _Sophesus_ (sarcophagus)
curtains, all silk; glasses set in gold, and everything you can mention,
all beautiful enough to astonish you; just, for all the world, like one
of them grand cafes on the Boulevards! As for the carpets,--oh, you
never trod on the like of them, I'll be bound. Put your foot on them,
and you'd fancy you was stepping on velvet, and take it off again for
fear of spoiling it. When everything was completed, the commandant came
to look at it,--just to see if he could find out anything more he
wanted; but he could not. So then he spoke to Alfred, and says he,
'Could you take charge of my rooms and keep them in nice order, light
fires from time to time, and get them ready for me when I wish to occupy
them? I shall not be here often,' says he, 'and would always write you a
line before coming, to give you time to prepare them.' 'Yes, commandant,
I can,' answers my flatterer of an Alfred. 'And what shall you charge?'
'Twenty francs a month, commandant.' 'Twenty francs!' exclaimed the
commandant. 'Why, porter, you are jesting, surely!' And hereupon he
began bating Alfred down in the most shabby manner, trying to squeeze
poor people like us out of two or three miserable francs, when he had
been squandering thousands in fitting up his grand apartments, which,
after all, he did not mean to live in! However, after a deal of
battling, we got twelve francs a month out of him,--a paltry, pitiful,
two-farthing captain! What a difference, now, between you and him!"
added the porteress, addressing Rodolph with an admiring glance. "You
don't call yourself fine names and titles,--you only look like a plain
body,--you must be poor, or you would not perch yourself on the fourth
floor; and yet you agreed with me for six francs, without attempting to
bate me down!"

"And when did the commandant pay you his next visit?"

"I'll tell you,--and good fun it is, too. My gentleman must have been
nicely choused by somebody. Three times did he write (same as to-day),
ordering us to light a fire and have everything ready for the reception
of a lady he expected would come. Come! Yes, I daresay he may expect a
long time first, I rather think."

"Nobody came then?"

"Listen. The first time the commandant arrived, strutting and swelling
like a turkey-cock, humming and singing, after his manner, all the gay
tunes of the day, walking up and down his fine room with his hands stuck
in his pockets, and occasionally stopping to arrange his hair before the
glass,--we were watching him all the time. Well, this went on for two or
three hours, when, I suppose, he knew it was no use waiting any longer;
so he came down-stairs very softly, and with quite a different manner to
the pride and consequence he had marched up with. By way of teasing him,
Pipelet and I went out to him and said, 'Commandant, there has been no
lady whatever to inquire for you,' 'Very well! Very well!' exclaimed he,
half mad and half ashamed of being laughed at, and, buttoning up his
coat, he walked off as fast as he could. The next time, before he came
himself, a small note was brought here by a man, directed to M. Charles;
I strongly suspected he was done again, and Pipelet and me were enjoying
a hearty good laugh over it when the commandant arrived. 'Captain,'
says I, putting the back of my hand up to my wig, by way of military
salute, 'here is a letter for you, but I am afraid it contains news of a
second countermarch against you.' He looked at me sour as a crab,
snatched the letter from my hand, read it, turned scarlet as a boiled
lobster, then walked off, pretending to whistle; but he was finely
vexed,--ready to hang himself, I could see he was,--and it was rare nuts
to me. 'Go, and swallow that pill, my two-farthing captain,' says I to
myself; 'that serves you right for only giving twelve francs a month for
minding your apartments.'"

"And the third time?"

"Ah, the third time I really thought it was all right. The commandant
arrived more stuck up with pride than ever; his eyes staring with
self-satisfied admiration at himself and the certainty of not being
disappointed this time. Let me tell the truth about him; he really is a
good-looking man, and dresses well, though he stinks of musk like a
civet cat. Well, there was my gentleman arrayed in all his finery, and
scarcely condescending to look at us poor folks; he seemed as though he
conferred a favour on the earth by deigning to walk on it, and went,
sticking his nose into the air, as if he meant to touch the clouds with
it. He took the key, and said to us, as he passed up-stairs, in a
jeering, self-complacent tone, as though to revenge himself for having
been laughed at twice before, 'You will direct the lady to my apartments
when she comes.' Well, Pipelet and I were so anxious to see the lady he
expected, though we did not much reckon upon her keeping her
appointment, even if she ever made one, that we went and hid ourselves
behind the little door that belongs to the alley; and, behold! in a
short time a blue hackney-coach, with its blinds drawn down, stopped at
the entrance to the house. 'There she is!' says I to Alfred. 'There is
his madame; let's keep back a bit for fear we frighten her away.' The
coachman got off his box and opened the door. Then we saw a female,
closely covered with a black veil, and carrying a muff; she had
apparently been crying, for she kept her handkerchief to her face; for
when the steps were let down, instead of alighting, she said some few
words to the driver, who, much surprised, shut the door up again."

"Then the lady did not get out?"

"No! she threw herself back in the coach and pressed her handkerchief
tightly to her eyes. I rushed out, and before the coachman had time to
get on his seat again, I called out, 'Hallo, there, coachy! are you
going back again?' 'Yes,' says he. 'Where?' says I. 'Where I came from,'
answers he. 'And where did you come from?' asks I again. 'From the Rue
St. Dominique, corner of the Rue Belle Chasse.'"

Rodolph started at these words. His dearest friend, the Marquis
d'Harville, who, as elsewhere stated, had been for some time labouring
under a deep melancholy none could penetrate, lived in the very place
just mentioned by Madame Pipelet. Could this mysterious female in the
blue _fiacre_ be the Marquise d'Harville? And was it from the lightness
and frivolity of her conduct that the mind of her excellent husband was
bowed down by doubts and misgivings? These painful suggestions crowded
on Rodolph's mind, but, although well acquainted with all the various
guests received by the marquise, he could recollect no one answering the
description of the commandant; added to which, any female might have
taken a hackney-coach from that spot without necessarily living in the
street. There was really nothing to identify the unknown of the blue
_fiacre_ with Madame d'Harville, and yet a thousand vague fears and
painful suspicions crossed his mind; his uneasy manner and deep
abstraction did not escape the porteress.

"What are you thinking of, sir?" asked she at length.

"I was wondering what could have induced the lady, after coming to the
very door, to change her mind so suddenly."

"There is no saying; some sudden thought,--dread or fear,--for we poor
women are but weak, cowardly things," said the porteress, assuming a
timid, frightened manner. "Well, I think if it had been myself now,
coming secretly to visit Alfred, I should have had to try back a great
many times before I could have screwed up my courage to venture in. But
then, as for visiting your great dons in this kind of way, I never could
have done such a thing. No, never! I am sure there is nobody under the
face of heaven can say I ever give them the least freedom,--I should
think not, indeed, while my poor dear old darling of a husband is left."

"No doubt,--no doubt, Madame Pipelet; but about the young person you
were describing in the blue _fiacre_?"

"Oh! mind, I don't know whether she was young or old; I could not even
catch a glimpse of the tip of her nose; all I can say is she went as she
came, and that is all about it. As for Alfred and me, we were better
pleased than if we had found ten francs."

"Why so?"

"By enjoying the rage and confusion of the commandant when he found
himself a third time disappointed; but, instead of going and telling him
at once that his 'madame' had been and gone, we allowed him to fume and
fret for a whole hour. Then I went softly up-stairs with only my list
slippers on. I reached his door, which I found half shut; as I pushed
against it, it creaked; the staircase is as black as night, and the
entrance to the apartment quite as obscure. Scarcely had I crept into
the room, when the commandant caught me in his arms, saying, in a
languishing voice, 'My dearest angel! what makes you so late?'"

Spite of the serious nature of the thoughts crowding upon his mind,
Rodolph could not restrain a smile as he surveyed the grotesque periwig
and hideously wrinkled, carbuncled visage of the heroine of this comic
scene.

Madame Pipelet, however, resumed her narration with a mirthful chuckle
that increased her ugliness:

"That was a go, wasn't it? But stop a bit. Well, I did not make the
least reply, but, almost keeping in my breath, I waited to see what
would be the end of this strange reception. For a minute or two the
commandant kept hugging me up, then, all of a sudden, the brute pushed
me away, exclaiming with as much disgust as though he had touched a
toad, 'Who the devil are you?' 'Me, commandant,--the porteress,--Madame
Pipelet; and, as such, I will thank you to keep your hands off my waist,
and not to call me your angel, and scold me for being late. Suppose
Alfred had heard you, a pretty business we should have made of it!'
'What the deuce brings you here?' cried he. 'Merely to let you know the
lady in the hackney-coach has just arrived!' 'Well, then, you stupid old
fool, show her up directly. Did I not tell you to do so?' 'Yes,
commandant; you said I was to show her up.' 'Then why do you not obey
me?' 'Because the lady--' 'Speak out, woman, if you can!' 'The lady has
gone again.' 'Something you have said or done, then, to offend her, I am
sure!' roared he in a perfect fury. 'Not at all, commandant. The lady
did not alight, but when the coach stopped and the driver opened the
door, she desired him to take her back to where she came from.' 'The
vehicle cannot have got far by this time,' exclaimed the commandant,
hastening towards the door. 'It has been gone upwards of an hour,'
answered I, enjoying his fury and disappointment. 'An hour! an hour! and
what, in the devil's name, hindered you from letting me know this
sooner?' 'Because, commandant, Alfred and I thought we would spare you
as long as we could the tidings of this third breakdown, which we
fancied might be too much for you.' Come, thinks I, there is something
to make you remember flinging me out of your arms, as though it made you
sick to touch me. 'Begone!' bawled out the commandant. 'You hideous old
hag! You can neither say nor do the thing that is right,' and with this
he pulled off his dressing-gown and threw his beautiful Greek cap, made
of velvet embroidered with gold, on the ground: it was a real shame, for
the cap was a downright beauty; and as for the dressing-gown, oh, my! it
would set anybody longing. Meanwhile the commandant kept pacing the
room, with his eyes glaring like a wild beast and glowing like two
glow-worms."

"But were you not afraid of losing his employ?"

"He knew too well what he was about for that; we had him in a fix, we
knew where his 'madame' lived, and had he said anything to us, we should
have threatened to expose the whole affair. And who do you think for his
beggarly twelve francs would have undertaken to attend to his rooms,--a
stranger? No! That we would have prevented; we would soon have made the
place too hot to hold any person he might appoint,--poor, shabby fellow
that he is! What do you think? He actually had the meanness to examine
his wood and put out the quantity he should allow to be burnt while he
was away. He is nothing but an upstart, I am sure,--a nobody, who has
suddenly tumbled into money he does not know how to spend properly,--a
rich man's head and a beggar's body, who squanders with one hand and
nips and pinches with the other. I do not wish him any harm, but it
amuses me immensely to think how he has been befooled; and he will go on
believing and expecting from day to day, because he is too vain to
imagine he is being laughed at. At any rate, if the lady ever comes in
reality, I will let my friend the oyster-woman next door know; she
enjoys a joke as well as I do, and is quite as curious as myself to find
out what sort of person she is, whether fair or dark, pretty or plain.
And--who knows?--this woman may be cheating some easygoing simpleton of
a husband for the sake of our two-penny-halfpenny of a commandant! Well,
that is no concern of mine, but I am sorry, too, for the poor, dear,
deceived individual, whoever he may be. Dear me! Dear me! My pot is
boiling over,--excuse me a minute, I must just look to it. Ah, it is
time Alfred was in, for dinner is quite ready, and tripe, you know,
should never be kept waiting. This tripe is done to a turn. Do you
prefer the thick or thin tripe? Alfred likes it thick. The poor darling
has been sadly out of spirits lately, and I got this dainty dish to
cheer him up a bit; for, as Alfred says himself, that for a bribe of
good thick tripe he would betray France itself,--his beloved France.
Yes, the dear old pet would change his country for such fine fat tripe
as this, he would."

While Madame Pipelet was thus delivering her domestic harangue upon the
virtues of tripe and the powerful influence it possessed over even the
patriotism of her husband, Rodolph was buried in the deepest and most
sombre reflections. The female, whose visits to the house had just been
detailed, be she the Marquise d'Harville or any other individual, had
evidently long struggled with her imprudence ere she had brought herself
to grant a first and second rendezvous, and then, terrified at the
probable consequences of her imprudence, a salutary remorse had, in all
probability, prevented her from fulfilling her dangerous engagement. It
might be that the fine person this M. Charles was described as
possessing had captivated the senses of Madame d'Harville, whom Rodolph
knew well as a woman of deep feeling, high intellect, and superior
taste, of an elevated turn of mind, and a reputation unsullied by the
faintest breath of slander. After long and mature consideration, he
succeeded in persuading himself that the wife of his friend had nothing
to do with the unknown female in the blue _fiacre_. Madame Pipelet,
having completed her culinary arrangements, resumed her conversation
with Rodolph.

"And who lives on the second floor?" inquired he of the porteress.

"Why, Mother Burette does,--a most wonderful woman at fortune-telling;
bless you, she can read in your hand the same as a book, and many quite
first-rate people come to her to have the cards consulted when they are
anxious about any particular matter. She earns her weight in gold, and
that is not a trifle, for she is a rare bundle of an old body. However,
telling fortunes is only one of her means of gaining a livelihood."

"Why, what does she do besides?"

"She keeps what you would call a pawnbroker's shop upon a small scale."

"I see; your second-floor lodger lends out again the money she derives
from her skill in foretelling events by reading the cards."

"Exactly so; only she is cheaper and more easy to deal with than the
regular pawnbrokers: she does not confuse you with a heap of paper
tickets and duplicates,--nothing of the sort. Now suppose: Some one
brings Mother Burette a shirt worth three francs; well, she lends ten
sous upon condition of being paid twenty at the end of the week,
otherwise she keeps the shirt for ever. That is simple enough, is it
not? Always in round figures, you see,--a child could understand it. And
the odd things she has brought her as pledges you would scarcely
believe. You can hardly guess what she sometimes is asked to lend upon.
I saw her once advance money upon a gray parrot that swore like a
trooper,--the blackguard did."

"A parrot? But to what amount did she advance money?"

"I'll tell you; the parrot was well known; it belonged to a Madame
Herbelot, the widow of a factor, living close by, and it was also well
understood that Madame Herbelot valued the parrot as much as she did her
life. Well, Mother Burette said to her, 'I will lend you ten francs on
your bird, but if by this day week at twelve o'clock I do not receive
twenty francs with interest (it would amount to that in round numbers),
if I am not paid my twenty francs, with the expenses of his keep, I
shall give your Polly a trifling dose of arsenic mixed with his food.'
She knew her customer well, bless you! However, by this threat Mother
Burette received her twenty francs at the end of seven days, and Madame
Herbelot got back her disagreeable, screaming parrot."

"Mother Burette has no other way of living besides the two you have
named, I suppose?"

"Not that I know of. I don't know, however, what to say of some rather
sly and secret transactions, carried on in a small room she never allows
any one to enter, except M. Bras Rouge and an old one-eyed woman, called
La Chouette."

Rodolph opened his eyes with unmixed astonishment as these names sounded
on his ear, and the porteress, interpreting the surprise of her future
lodger according to her own notions, said:

"That name would make any one stare with astonishment. Certainly La
Chouette is uncommonly odd; is it not?"

"It is, indeed. Does the woman who is so styled come here frequently?"

"We saw her the day before yesterday, for the first time these six
weeks. She was rather lame, I observed."

"And what do you suppose she wants with the fortune-telling woman?"

"That I do not know; at least, as to what takes place in the little room
I was telling you of, where La Chouette alone is admitted with M. Bras
Rouge and Mother Burette. I have, however, particularly observed that on
those occasions the one-eyed woman always has a large bundle with her
in her basket, and that M. Bras Rouge also carries a parcel of some size
beneath his cloak, and that they always return empty-handed."

"And what can these packets contain?"

"The Lord above knows, for I don't; only they kick up the devil's own
row with them, whatever they are. And then such whiffs of sulphur,
charcoal, and melted lead, as you go up the stairs; and blow, blow,
blow, like a smith's forge. I verily believe Mother Burette has dealings
with the old one, and practises magic in this private apartment;
leastways, that is what M. César Bradamanti, our third-floor lodger,
said to me. A very clever individual is M. César. When I say an
'individual,' I mean an Italian, though he speaks as good French as you
or me, excepting his accent, and that is nothing. Oh, he is very clever,
indeed! knows all about physic; and pulls out teeth, not for the sake of
the money but the honour of his profession,--yes, really, sir, for
downright honour. Now, suppose you had six decayed teeth,--and he says
the same thing to all who choose to listen to him,--well, then he will
take out five for nothing, and only charge you for the sixth. Besides
which, he sells all manner of remedies for all sorts of
complaints,--diseases of the lungs, coughs, colds, every complaint you
can name; but then he makes his own drugs, and he has for his assistant
the son of our principal lessee, little Tortillard. He says that his
master is going to buy himself a horse and a red coat, and to sell his
drugs in the market-places, and that young Tortillard is to be dressed
like a page and be at the drum, to attract customers."

"This seems to me a very humble occupation for the son of your principal
lessee."

"Why, his father says unless he gets a pretty strong hand over him, and
a tolerably powerful taste of whipcord, in the way of a sound thrashing,
every now and then, he is safe to come to the scaffold. And he is about
the ugliest, most spiteful, ill-disposed young rascal one would wish to
meet: he has played more than one abominable trick upon poor M. César
Bradamanti, who is the best creature possible; for he cured Alfred of a
rheumatic attack, and I promise you we have not forgotten it. Yet there
are some people wicked enough to--But no, I will not tell you: it would
make the hair of your head stand on end. As Alfred says, if it were
true, it would send him to the galleys."

"Why, what do they accuse him of?"

"Oh, I really cannot tell you! I can't, indeed; for it is so--"

"Then we will drop the subject."

"And to say such things of a young man! Upon my life and soul, it is too
bad."

"Pray, Madame Pipelet, do not give yourself the trouble of saying any
more about it: let us speak of other matters."

"Why, I don't know but, as you are to live in the house, it is only fair
and right to prepare you for any falsehoods you may hear. I suppose you
are sufficiently well off to make the acquaintance of M. César
Bradamanti, and unless you are put on your guard against these reports,
they might lead to your breaking off with him. So, just put your ear
down and I'll whisper what it is people say about him."

And the old woman, in a low tone, muttered a few words as Rodolph
inclined his head; he started from her, with mingled disgust and horror.

"Impossible!" exclaimed he. "Surely human nature is not capable of such
crimes!"

"Shocking! Is it not? But treat it as I do,--all scandal and lies. What,
do you think the man who cured Alfred's rheumatism,--who draws five
teeth out of six for nothing,--who has testimonies (testimonials) from
every prince and king in the world,--and, above all, pays as he goes,
down on the nail, would go for to do such things? Not he! I'll stake my
blessed life upon it."

While Madame Pipelet thus vented her indignant opinion concerning the
reports in circulation, Rodolph recalled to his memory the letter he had
seen addressed to the quack dentist; he remembered the counterfeited
writing and the coarse, common paper, stained with tears, which had
well-nigh obliterated part of the address,--too well did he see in the
mysterious grief-stained epistle the opening of a drama of deep and
fearful import; and while these sad presages filled his mind, a powerful
impression whispered within him that the dreadful doings ascribed to the
Italian were not altogether unfounded.

"Oh, I declare, here comes Alfred!" exclaimed the porteress. "Now he
will tell you his opinion of all these spiteful stories about poor M.
Bradamanti. Bless you! Alfred thinks him as innocent as a lamb, ever
since he cured his rheumatics."

M. Pipelet entered the lodge with a grave, magisterial air. He was about
sixty years of age, comfortably fat, with a large, broad countenance,
strongly resembling in its cast and style the faces carved upon the
far-famed nutcrackers of Nuremberg; a nose, of more than ordinary
proportions, helping to complete the likeness. An old and dingy-looking
hat, with a very deep brim, surmounted the whole. Alfred, who adhered to
this upper ornament as tenaciously as his wife did to her Brutus wig,
was further attired in an ancient green coat, with immense flaps turned
up with grease,--if so might be described the bright and shiny patches
of long-accumulated dirt, which had given an entirely different hue to
some portions of the garment. But, though clad in a hat and coat
esteemed by Pipelet and his wife as closely resembling full dress,
Alfred had not laid aside the modest emblem of his trade, but from his
waist uprose the buff-coloured triangular front of his leathern apron,
partly concealing a waistcoat boasting nearly as great a variety of
colours as did the patchwork counterpane of Madame Pipelet.

The porter's recognition of Rodolph as he entered was gracious in the
extreme; but, alas! he smiled a melancholy welcome, and his countenance
and languid air marked a man of secret sorrow.

"Alfred," said Madame Pipelet, when she had introduced her two
companions, "here is a gentleman after the apartment on the fourth
floor, and we have only been waiting for you to drink a glass of cordial
he sent for."

This delicate attention won for Rodolph the entire trust and confidence
of the melancholy porter, who, touching the brim of his hat, said, in a
deep bass voice worthy of being employed in a cathedral:

"We shall give the gentleman every satisfaction as porters, and,
doubtless, he will act the same by us as a lodger; 'birds of a feather
flock together,' as the proverb says." Then, interrupting himself, M.
Pipelet anxiously added, "Providing, sir, you are not a painter!"

"No, I am not a painter, but a plain merchant's clerk."

"My most humble duty to you, sir. I congratulate you that Nature did not
make you one of those monsters called artists."

"Artists, monsters!" returned Rodolph. "Tell me, pray, why you style
them so."

Instead of replying, M. Pipelet elevated his clasped hands towards the
ceiling, and allowed a heavy sound, between a grunt and a groan, to
escape his overcharged breast.

"You must know, sir," said Madame Pipelet, in a low tone, to Rodolph,
"that painters have embittered Alfred's life; they have worried my poor
old dear almost out of his senses, and made him half stupefied, as you
see him now." Then speaking loud, she added, in a caressing tone, "Oh,
never mind the blackguard, there's a dear, but try and forget all about
it, or you will be ill, and unable to eat the nice tripe I have got for
your dinner."

"Let us hope I shall have courage and firmness enough for all things,"
replied M. Pipelet, with a dignified and resigned air; "but he has done
me much harm; he has been my persecutor, almost my executioner,--long
have I suffered, but now I despise him! Ah," said he, turning to
Rodolph, "never allow a painter to enter your doors; they are the
plague--the ruin--the destruction of a house!"

"You have, then, had a painter lodging with you, I presume?"

"Unhappily, sir, I did have one," replied M. Pipelet, with much
bitterness, "and that one named Cabrion. Ah!"

At the recollections brought back by this name, the porter's declaration
of courage and endurance utterly failed him, and again his clenched
fists were raised, as though to invoke the vengeance he had so lately
described himself as despising.

"And was this individual the last occupant of the chamber I am about
engaging?" inquired Rodolph.

"No, no! The last lodger was an excellent young man named M. Germain.
No, this Cabrion had the room before he came. Ah, sir, since Cabrion
left, he has all but driven me stark staring mad!"

"Did you, then, so much regret him?" asked Rodolph.

"Regret him! Regret Cabrion!" screamed the astounded porter; "why, only
imagine, M. Bras Rouge paid him two quarters' rent to induce him to quit
the place, for, unluckily, he had taken his apartments for a term. What
a scamp he was! You have no idea of the horrible tricks he played off
upon all the lodgers as well as us. Why, just to give you one little
proof of his villainy, there was hardly a single wind instrument he did
not make use of as a sort of annoyance to the lodgers; from the French
horn to the flageolet, he made use of all, and even carried his
rascality so far as to play false and to keep blowing the same note for
hours together; it was enough to worry one out of one's senses. Well, I
suppose there were upwards of twenty different petitions sent to our
chief lessee, M. Bras Rouge, to turn the beggar out; and, at last, he
was only got rid of by paying him two quarters' rent,--rather droll, is
it not, for a landlord to pay his lodger? But, bless you, the house was
so upset by him that he might have had any price so he would but take
himself off; however, he _did_ go. And now you suppose we were clear of
M. Cabrion? I'll tell you. Next night, about eleven o'clock, I was in
bed, when rap, rap, rap, comes to the gate. I pulls up the
string,--somebody walks up to my door, 'How do you do, porter?' says a
voice; 'will you oblige me with a lock of your hair?' 'Somebody has
mistaken the door,' says my wife. So I calls out to the stranger, 'You
are wrong, friend, you want next door.' 'I think not,' returns the
voice; 'this is No. 17, is it not, and the porter's name is Pipelet? I'm
all right; so please to open the door and oblige me with a lock of your
beautiful hair.' 'My name is Pipelet, certainly,' answers I. 'Well,
then, friend Pipelet, Cabrion has sent me for a piece of your hair; he
says he must and he will have it.'"

As Pipelet uttered the last words he gave his head a mournful shake,
and, folding his arms, assumed an attitude of martyrlike resolution.

"Do you perceive, sir? He sends to me, his mortal enemy, whom he
overwhelmed with insults and continually outraged in every way, to beg a
lock of my hair,--a favour which even ladies have been known to refuse
to a lover!"

"But, supposing this Cabrion had been as good a lodger as was M.
Germain," replied Rodolph, with some difficulty preserving the gravity
of countenance, "do you think you might have accorded him the favour?"

"Not to the best lodger that treads shoe-leather would I grant a similar
request," replied the man in the flapped hat, waving it majestically
over his brows as he spoke; "it is contrary to my principles and habits
to give my hair to any one,--only I should have refused with the most
scrupulous regard to politeness."

"That is not all," chimed in the porteress. "Only conceive, sir, the
abominable conduct of that Cabrion, who, from morning to night, at all
hours and at all times, sends a swarm of vagabonds like himself to ask
Alfred for a lock of his hair,--always for Cabrion!"

"Ah, monsieur," sighed out poor Pipelet, "had I committed the most
atrocious crimes, my sleep could not have been rendered more broken and
unrefreshing; scarcely do I fall into a doze than I wake starting with
the idea of being called by that cursed Cabrion! I suspect
everybody,--in each person who approaches me I see an emissary from my
persecutor come to request a lock of my hair. I am losing my good
spirits, my temper, and becoming gloomy, suspicious, peevish, and
ill-natured. This infernal Cabrion has murdered my whole life!"

And Pipelet heaved so profound a sigh that his hat, vibrating for some
time from the consequences of the convulsive shake of the head
occasioned thereby, fell forward and completely veiled his care-stricken
features.

"I can well understand, now," said Rodolph, "that you are not
particularly partial to painters; but I suppose the M. Germain you were
praising so highly made up for the bad treatment you received from M.
Cabrion?"

"Yes, yes, sir; as I told you, M. Germain was a delightful young man, so
honourable and kind-hearted, open as the day, and ever ready to serve
and oblige; he was cheerful and merry as need be, but then he always
kept his high spirits within proper bounds instead of worrying people to
death by his unmeaning hoaxes, like that Cabrion, who I wish was at the
devil!"

"Come, come, my good M. Pipelet, I must not let you thus excite
yourself; and who, now, is the person fortunate enough to possess such a
pattern of a lodger as this M. Germain seems to have been?"

"That is more than I can tell you; no one knows whither he has gone, nor
are they likely, except, indeed, through Mlle. Rigolette."

"And who is Mlle. Rigolette?" demanded Rodolph.

"Why, she is a needlewoman, also living on the fourth floor," cried
Madame Pipelet; "another pattern lodger, always pays her rent in
advance, and keeps her little chamber so nice and clean; then she is
well behaved to every one, so merry and happy, like a bird, though, poor
thing! very like a caged bird, obliged to work early and late to earn
two francs a day, and often not half that, let her try ever so hard."

"How does it happen that Mlle. Rigolette should be the only person
entrusted with the secret of M. Germain's present abode?"

"Why, when he was going away, he came to us and said," returned Madame
Pipelet, "'I do not expect any letters; but if, by chance, any should
come, please to give them to Mlle. Rigolette.' And she is well worthy of
his confidence, if his letters were filled with gold; don't you think
so, Alfred?"

"The fact is," said the porter, in a severe tone, "that I know no harm
of Mlle. Rigolette, excepting her permitting herself to be wheedled over
by that vile scamp, Cabrion."

"But you know, Alfred, that nothing more than a few harmless attentions
passed between them," interrupted the porteress; "for, though Mlle.
Rigolette is as merry as a kitten, she is as prudent and correct as I am
myself. You should see the strong bolts she has inside her door; and if
her next-door neighbour will make love to her, that is not her fault; it
follows as a matter of course when people are so close to each other.
It was just the same with the travelling-clerk we had here before
Cabrion, and so it was when M. Germain took the room this abominable
painter occupied. So, as I say, there is no blame to Mlle. Rigolette; it
arises out of the two rooms joining one another so closely,--naturally
that brings about a little flirtation, but nothing more."

"So, then, it becomes a matter of course, does it," said Rodolph, "that
every one who occupies the apartment I am to have should make love to
Mlle. Rigolette?"

"Why, of course, monsieur; how can you be good neighbours without
it,--don't you see? Now, imagine yourself lodging in the very next room
to a nice, pretty, obliging young person, like Mlle. Rigolette; well,
then, young people will be young people,--sometimes you want a light,
sometimes a few live coals to kindle up your fire, maybe a little
water,--for one is sure always to find plenty of fresh spring water at
Mlle. Rigolette's, she is never without it; it is her only luxury,--she
is like a little duck, always dabbling in it; and if she does happen to
have a little leisure, such a washing down of floors and cleaning of
windows! Never the least soil or neglect about either herself or her
apartment, and so you will find."

"And so M. Germain, by reason of his close proximity to Mlle. Rigolette,
became what you style upon perfectly neighbourly terms with her?"

"Oh, bless you, yes! Why, the two seemed cut out for each other, so
young and so good-looking! It was quite a pleasure to look at them as
they came down-stairs of a Sunday to take the only walk, poor things!
they could afford themselves throughout the week; she dressed in a smart
little cap and a gown that cost, probably, not more than twenty-five
sous the ell, but made by herself, and that so tastily that it became
her as much as though it had been of satin; he, mind ye, dressed and
looking like a regular gentleman."

"And M. Germain has not been to see Mlle. Rigolette, I suppose, since he
quitted the house?"

"No, monsieur; unless on Sunday, for Mlle. Rigolette has no time during
the other six days of the week to think of sweethearting. Why, the poor
girl rises at five or six o'clock, and works incessantly till ten or
eleven o'clock at night, never once leaving her room except for a few
minutes in the morning, when she goes out to buy food for herself and
her two canary-birds; and the three eat but very little, just a
penn'orth of milk, a little bread, some chickweed, bird-seed, and clear
fresh water, and the whole three of them sing away as merrily as though
they fared ever so sumptuously. And Mlle. Rigolette is kind and
charitable, too, as far as lies in her power; that is to say, she gives
her time, her sleep, and her services; for, poor girl! she can scarcely
manage to keep herself by working closely for twelve hours a day. Those
poor, unfortunate creatures in the attics, whom M. Bras Rouge is going
to turn into the streets in two or three days' time, if even he wait so
long,--why, Mlle. Rigolette and M. Germain sat up with the children
night after night!"

"You have a distressed family, then, here?"

"Distressed! Oh, God bless you, my good sir, I think we have, indeed.
Why, there are five young children, an almost dying mother, an idiotic
grandmother, and their only support a man who, though he slaves like a
negro, cannot even get bread enough to eat,--and a capital workman he
is, too; three hours' sleep out of the twenty-four is all he allows
himself,--and what sleep it is! broken by his children crying for food,
by the groans of his sick wife tossing on her miserable straw bed, or
the idiotic screams of the poor bedridden old grandmother, who sometimes
howls like a wolf,--from hunger, too,--for, poor creature! she has not
sense or reason to know better, and when she gets very hungry you may
hear cries and screams all down the staircase."

"Horrible!" exclaimed Rodolph, with a shudder; "and does no one afford
them any assistance?"

"Truly, sir, we do all we can; we are but poor ourselves; however, since
the commandant has allowed me his paltry twelve francs a month for
looking after his apartments, I have managed once a week to make a
little broth for these poor, unfortunate creatures. Mlle. Rigolette
deprives herself of her night's rest, and sits up, poor girl (though it
burns her candles), contriving out of one bit and the other of her
cutting out, to make up a few clothes for the children; sometimes from
the morsels left of her work she manages a small nightcap or gown; and
M. Germain, who had not a franc more than he knew what to do with, used
to pretend, from time to time, that he had received a present of a few
bottles of wine from his friends; and Morel (that is the name of the
workman with the sick family) was sure to be invited to share it with
him; and it was really wonderful to see how refreshed and strengthened
poor Morel used to seem after M. Germain had made him take a good pull
at his wine, to put, as he used to say, a little life and soul into his
half-exhausted body."

"And the surgeon-dentist, what did he do for this wretched family?"

"M. Bradamanti?" said the porter. "Ah! he cured my rheumatism, and I owe
him my eternal gratitude; but from that day I said to my wife,
'Anastasia, M. Bradamanti'--hum!--hum!--did I not say so, Anastasia?"

"Exactly; that is precisely what you did say."

"But I want to know what this M. Bradamanti did to assist the poor
starving beings in your garrets."

"Why, you see, monsieur, when I mentioned to M. Bradamanti the misery
and utter destitution of poor Morel--by the way, he first began the
conversation by complaining that the raving and screaming of the old
idiot woman throughout the night for food prevented him from sleeping,
and that he found it very unpleasant; however, he listened to my
description of the state the whole family was in, and then he said,
'Well, if they are so much distressed, you may tell them that if they
want any teeth drawn, I will excuse them paying even for the sixth.'"

"I tell you what, Madame Pipelet," said Rodolph, "I have a decidedly bad
opinion of this man. And your female pawnbroker, was she more
charitable?"

"Very much after the fashion of M. Bradamanti," said the porteress; "she
lent a few sous upon their wretched clothes; every garment they had has
passed into her hands, and even their last mattress; but they were not
long coming to the last, for they never had but two."

"But she gave them no further aid?"

"Help them, poor creatures! Not she. Mother Burette is as great a brute
in her way as her lover, M. Bras Rouge, is in his; for between you and
I," added the porteress, with an uncommonly knowing wink of the eye and
sagacious shake of the head, "there is something rather tender going on
between these two."

"Really!" cried Rodolph.

"I think so,--I do, upon my life. And why not? Why, the folks in St.
Martin are as loving as the rest of the world; are they not, my old
pet?"

A melancholy shake of the head, which produced a corresponding motion in
the huge black hat, was M. Pipelet's only answer. As for Madame Pipelet,
since she had begun expressing sympathy for the poor sufferers in the
attics, her countenance had ceased to strike Rodolph as repulsive, and
he even thought it wore an agreeable expression.

"And what is this poor Morel's trade?"

"A maker of false jewelry; he works by the piece; but, dear me! that
sort of work is so much imitated, and so cheaply got up that--For a man
can but work his best, and he cannot do more than he can; besides, when
you have got to find bread for seven persons without reckoning yourself,
it is rather a hard job, I take it. And though his eldest daughter does
her best to assist the family, she has but very little in her power."

"How old is this daughter?"

"About eighteen, and as lovely a young creature as you would see in a
long summer's day. She lives as servant with an old miserly fellow, rich
enough to buy and sell half Paris,--a notary, named M. Jacques Ferrand."

"M. Jacques Ferrand!" exclaimed Rodolph, surprised at the fresh
coincidence which brought under his notice the very individual from
whom, or from whose confidential housekeeper, he expected to glean so
many particulars relative to La Goualeuse. "M. Jacques Ferrand, who
lives in the Rue du Sentier, do you mean?" inquired he.

"The very same; are you acquainted with him?"

"Not at all; but he does the law business for the firm I belong to."

"Ah! then you must know that he is a regular money-grubbing old usurer;
but then, let me do the man justice. He is strictly religious, and
devout as a monk; never absent from mass or vespers, making his Easter
offerings, and going regularly to confession. If he ever enjoys himself,
it is only along with the priests, drinking holy water, and eating
blessed bread. Oh, he is almost a saint in the strictness of his life;
but, then, his heart is as hard as iron, and as stern and rigid towards
others as he is severe towards himself. Why, poor Louise, daughter to
our sick lodger, has been his only servant for the last eighteen months.
And what a good girl she is! Gentle as a lamb in temper and disposition,
but willing as a horse to work; and he only gives this poor thing, who
slaves herself to death for him, eighteen francs a month,--not a
farthing more, I give you my word; and out of this she only keeps back
six francs for her own maintenance, and hands over the other twelve to
her starving family; that has been all their dependence for some time
past; but when seven persons have to live upon it, it does not go far."

"But what does the father earn,--I mean, provided he is industrious?"

"Industrious! God bless you, he has always overworked himself; he is the
soberest, steadiest creature alive; and I verily believe that if he had
the promise of obtaining any favour he liked to ask of Heaven, it would
be that the day might be made doubly as long as it now is, that he might
earn bread enough to stop the cries of his starving brats."

"Then the father cannot earn enough if he were to try ever so hard, it
seems?"

"Why, the poor man was ill abed for three months, and that threw them
all behind; his wife's health was quite ruined by the fatigue of nursing
him and the severe want she experienced of common necessaries for
herself and family. She now lies in a dying state; they have had nothing
for all that period besides Louise's wages and what they could obtain
from Mother Burette upon the few wretched articles they could dispose
of. True, the master for whom Morel had worked advanced them a trifle,
out of respect for a man he had always found punctual and honest when he
could work. But, la! Eight people only to be found in bread, that is
what I say,--just imagine how hard it must be to keep life and soul
together upon such small means; and if you could only see the hole they
are all huddled together in--But do not let us talk any more about that,
monsieur, for our dinner is ready, and the very thought of their
wretched garret turns my stomach. However, happily, M. Bras Rouge is
going to clear the house of them,--when I say happily, I don't mean it
ill-naturedly in the least; but since these poor Morels have fallen
into such misery, and it is quite out of our power to help them, why
let them go and be miserable elsewhere; it will be a heartache the less
for us all."

"But, if they are turned out from here, where will they go to?"

"Truly, I don't know."

"And how much can this poor workman earn daily when in health, and
without any calls upon his time or attention?"

"Why, if he had not to attend to his old mother, nurse his sick wife,
and look after the five children, he could earn his three or four francs
a day, because he works like a downright slave; but now that at least
three-quarters of his time are taken up with the family, he can hardly
manage to earn forty sous."

"That is little, indeed,--poor creatures!"

"Yes, it is easy to say poor creatures, but there are so many equally
poor creatures, that, as we can do nothing for them, it is no use to
worry ourselves about it,--is it, Alfred? And, talking of consoling
ourselves, there stands the cassia, and we have never thought of tasting
it."

"To tell you the truth, Madame Pipelet, after what I have just heard I
have no inclination to partake of it. You and M. Pipelet must drink my
health in it when I am gone."

"You are extremely kind, sir," said the porter; "but will you not like
to see the rooms up-stairs?"

"I shall be glad to do so, if perfectly convenient; and, if they suit, I
will engage them at once and leave a deposit."

The porter, followed by Rodolph, emerged from the gloomy lodge, and
proceeded up-stairs.




CHAPTER XXIV.

THE FOUR STORIES.


The damp, dark staircase looked still more gloomy through the fog of a
November day. The entrance to each separate set of apartments in this
house bore its own peculiar and distinctive character to the observant
eye. Thus, the door conducting to those of the commandant bore evidences
of having been recently painted in close imitation of ebony, being
further set off with a brass knob rubbed up to a most dazzling
brightness, while a gay-coloured bell-rope, finished by an enormous
tassel of scarlet silk, contrasted strongly with the mean and shabby
wall against which it hung.

The door of the flight above, where dwelt the female money-lender and
dealer in divination, was singularly characterised by the appearance of
that mystical symbol of deep wisdom and oracular knowledge, an owl,
which, stuffed to resemble life as closely as the artist could contrive
it, was nailed on a small bracket just above the doorway; while a sort
of small wicket, latticed with wire-work, enabled all visitors to be
duly scrutinised ere they were admitted.

The dwelling of the Italian charlatan, who was said to pursue such
fearful avocations, had, likewise, its whimsical mode of designating the
pursuits of its occupant, whose name, traced in large letters formed of
horses' teeth upon a square black board, was nailed to the
entrance-door; while, instead of adopting the classical agency of a
deer's foot or a hare's pad for the handle of his bell, there hung
dangling from the cord the hand and arm of a dried ape,--the withered
limb, the shrivelled hand, with its five fingers, each so distinctly
preserved, and the articulation of every joint so clearly defined, the
tiny tips bearing the nails long and taper as those of a human creature,
presented a close and hideous resemblance to the hand and arm of a
child.

As Rodolph passed before a door so singularly indicative of all his
worst suspicions, he fancied he could detect the sound of smothered sobs
from within. Then rose up a cry so full of agony, of convulsive,
irrepressible misery,--a cry as if wrung from a breaking heart or the
last wail of expiring nature, that the whole house seemed to reëcho it.
Rodolph started; then, by a movement more rapid than thought itself, he
rushed to the door and violently pulled the bell.

"What is the matter, sir?" inquired the astonished porter.

"That cry!" said Rodolph; "did you not hear it?"

"Yes, yes, I heard it; I dare say it is some person whose teeth M.
Bradamanti is taking out; perhaps he may be taking out several,--and it
is painful!"

This explanation, though a probable one, did not satisfy Rodolph as to
the horrid scream which still resounded in his ears. Though he had rung
the bell with considerable violence, no person had as yet replied to his
summons; he could distinctly hear the shutting of several doors, and
then, behind a small oval glass let in beside the door, and on which
Rodolph had mechanically kept his eyes fixed, he saw the haggard,
cadaverous countenance of a human being; a mass of reddish hair strongly
mixed with gray, and a long beard of the same hue, completed the hideous
ensemble; the face was seen but for an instant, and vanished as quickly
as though it had been a mere creation of fancy, leaving Rodolph in a
state of perturbation impossible to describe.

Short as had been the period of this apparition's visit, he had yet in
those brief instants recalled features precisely similar and for ever
engraved on his memory,--the eyes shining with the colour and brilliancy
of the _aqua marina_ beneath their bushy sandy eyebrows, the livid
complexion, the nose thin, projecting, and curving like an eagle's beak,
with its nostrils so curiously expanded and carved out till they exposed
a portion of the nasal cartilage, resembled closely a certain Polidori,
whose name had been so unceremoniously committed by Murphy, in his
conversation with Graün, to regions not mentionable to polite ears.
Though Rodolph had not seen Polidori during the last sixteen or
seventeen years, he had a thousand reasons for keeping every feature
well in his remembrance. The only thing that told against the identity
of the individual he believed existed under the disguised name of this
quack dentist was the circumstance of his having red hair, while the
Polidori of Rodolph's acquaintance had almost black. That Rodolph
experienced no wonder (always supposing his conjectures as to the
identity correct) at finding a man whose profound learning, rare talent,
and vast intelligence he well knew, sunk to such a degradation,--it
might even be infamy,--was because he knew equally well that all these
high attainments and noble gifts were allied to such entire perversity,
such wild and irregular passions, inclinations so corrupt, and, above
all, an affected scorn and contempt for the opinion of the world, which
might lead this man, when want and misery overtook him, to seek, from
choice, the lowest and least honourable paths of subsistence, and to
enjoy a sort of malevolent satisfaction in the idea of him, the
talented, the learned, burying all these precious treasures beneath the
ignoble calling to which he had devoted his vast powers of mind and
body. Still, be it remembered that, spite of the close resemblance
between the charlatan surgeon-dentist and the Polidori of bygone years,
there still existed discrepancies so great that Rodolph balanced, in
deep uncertainty, respecting their proving to be one and the same
person.

At length, turning to Pipelet, he inquired:

"How long has this M. Bradamanti been an inmate of this house?"

"About a year, sir, as nearly as I can remember,--yes, it is a year; I
recollect he took the lodgings in the January quarter. Oh, he is a very
regular and exact lodger; he cured me of a desperate attack of
rheumatism."

"Madame Pipelet was telling me of the reports which are circulated of
him."

"How could she be so foolish?"

"Nay, pray do not fear me! I assure you I may safely be trusted."

"But, really, sir," rejoined Pipelet, "I do not think there is the least
dependence to be placed in such reports. I do not believe them, for one.
I never can believe them; my modesty would not let me," added M.
Pipelet, turning very red, and preceding his new lodger to the floor
above.

The more resolved upon clearing up his doubts in proportion to the very
great annoyance he felt that the residence of Polidori in the same house
would prove to him, and becoming momentarily more disposed to affix a
painful solution to the enigma of the piercing cry he had heard from the
apartments of the Italian, Rodolph bound himself by a rigid promise to
investigate the matter, so as to place it beyond the power of a doubt,
and followed the porter to the upper floor, where was situated the
chamber he was desirous of engaging.

It was easy to ascertain the abode of his next-door neighbour Mlle.
Rigolette. Thanks to the charming gallantry of the painter, Pipelet's
mortal foe, the door of her chamber was ornamented after the manner of
Watteau, with a panel design representing about half a dozen fat little
chubby Loves, grouped round a space painted sky blue, and on which was
traced, in pink letters, "_Mademoiselle Rigolette, Dressmaker_." These
plump little Cupids had all a task to perform besides encircling this
important announcement. One held the thimble of Mlle. Rigolette upon his
tiny finger; another held her scissors; a third was provided with a
smoothing-iron for her use; whilst a fourth held up a mirror, as if to
tempt the young sempstress to forsake her work for the more gratifying
view of her own pretty countenance. The whole was surrounded with a
well-chosen wreath of flowers, whose gay colours contrasted agreeably
with the sea-green colour of the door; the whole offering a very
unfavourable contrast to the mean and shabby-looking staircase. At the
risk of opening anew the bleeding wounds of Alfred, Rodolph ventured to
observe, while pointing to the door of Mlle. Rigolette:

"This, I suppose, is the work of M. Cabrion?"

"It is; he destroyed the painting of the door by daubing it over with a
parcel of fat, indecent children he called his _loves_. Had it not been
for the entreaties of Mlle. Rigolette, and the weakness of M. Bras
Rouge, I would have scratched it all off, as well as this palette filled
with horrid monsters, with their equally abominable master, whom you can
see drawn amongst them. You may know him by his steeple-crowned hat."

And there, sure enough, on the door of the room Rodolph was about to
hire, might be seen a palette surrounded by all kinds of odd and
whimsical creatures, the witty conceit of which might have done honour
to Callot. Rodolph followed the porter into a tolerably good-sized room,
accessible by a small entrance-closet, or antechamber, having two
windows opening into the Rue du Temple. Some fantastic sketches from the
pencil of M. Cabrion, on the second door, had been scrupulously
respected by M. Germain. Rodolph saw too many reasons for desiring to
obtain this lodging to hesitate further; therefore, modestly placing a
couple of francs in the hand of the porter, he said:

[Illustration: "'_This, I Suppose, Is the Work of M. Cabrion_'"
Etching by Mercier, after the drawing by Frank T. Merrill]

"This chamber will exactly suit me. Here is a deposit to complete the
bargain. To-morrow I will send in my furniture; but let me beg of you
not to destroy the merry creatures painted on the palette at the
entrance. It is really very droll! Don't you think so?"

"Droll!" groaned poor Pipelet; "not I! Ah, sir, how would you like to
dream night after night that you were being hunted by a legion of little
ugly devils like these on the door, with Cabrion at their head urging
them on, and then fancying you are trying to get away, and cannot? Oh, I
have woke all in a perspiration from such dreams hundreds of times since
that infamous Cabrion began persecuting me."

"Why, honestly speaking, I cannot say the chase would be a very
agreeable one, even though but a dream. However, tell me, have I any
need to see M. Bras Rouge--your great man here--about renting this
apartment?"

"None whatever, sir. He rarely comes near the place, except when he has
any private matters to arrange with Mother Burette. I am the only person
to treat with about hiring apartments. I must beg the favour of your
name."

"Rodolph."

"Rodolph what?"

"Plain Rodolph, M. Pipelet,--nothing more, if you please."

"Just as you please, sir. I did not ask from curiosity. Every man has a
right to his own free will, as well as to decide upon the name he
chooses to be called."

"What do you think, M. Pipelet, as to the propriety of my going
to-morrow, as a new neighbour of Morel's, to inquire whether I can be of
any service to them? Since my predecessor, M. Germain, was permitted to
assist them according to _his_ means, why should they not accept of what
trifling help I can afford?"

"Why, sir, I see no harm in your going to call on the Morels, because it
may please the poor things; but I hardly see much good it can do, as
they are so shortly to be turned out of the house." Then, as if suddenly
struck with a new idea, M. Pipelet exclaimed, winking at Rodolph with
what he intended should be a very facetious and penetrating look, "I
see, I see,--you mean to begin making acquaintance with the lodgers at
the top of the house, that you may be able to work your way down to
Mlle. Rigolette. Ah, I've found you out, you see,--pretty girl--"

"Well, I think you have discovered my intentions, so I will confess at
once that I mean to try and be on friendly terms with my agreeable
neighbour."

"There is no harm in that, sir,--it is customary; only all correct, all
right and honourable,--you understand. Between you and me, I strongly
suspect Mlle. Rigolette heard us coming up-stairs, and that she is
watching to have a look as we go down. I will make a noise purposely in
locking the door; if you look sharp, you will see her as we pass the
landing." And, true to the porter's suspicions, the door so tastefully
enlivened by the fat Cupids, _à la Watteau_, was seen to open gently,
and Rodolph had a brief view of a little, turned-up nose, and a pair of
large, staring black eyes, peeping through the narrow space; but, as he
slacked his steps, the door was hastily shut. "I told you she was
watching us," said the porter. Then added, "Excuse me one instant, sir;
I want to step up to my warehouse."

"Where is that?"

"At the top of this ladder is the landing-place, on which the door of
Morel's garret opens, and in the wainscoting of this landing is a small
dark cupboard, where I keep my leather, and the wall is so full of
cracks, that when I am in this hole I can see and hear everything, the
same as if I was in Morel's room. Not that I wish to spy what the poor
creatures are about, God knows,--quite the contrary. But please to
excuse me for a few minutes, sir, whilst I fetch my bit of leather. If
you will have the goodness to go down-stairs, I will rejoin you."

And, so saying, Pipelet commenced ascending the steep ladder
communicating with his warehouse, as he styled it,--a somewhat perilous
feat for a person of his age.

Rodolph, thus left alone, cast another glance towards the chambers of
Mlle. Rigolette, remembering with deep interest all he had heard of her
being the favourite companion of the poor Goualeuse, and recalling also
the information she was said to possess touching the residence of the
Schoolmaster's son, when the sound of some person quitting the
apartments of the quack doctor below attracted his attention, and he
could distinctly hear the light step of a female, with the rustling of a
silk dress. Rodolph paused till the sounds had died away, and then
descended the stairs. Something white had fallen about half-way down; it
had evidently been dropped by the person who had just quitted Polidori.
Rodolph picked it up, and carried it to one of the narrow windows which
lighted the staircase. It was a pocket-handkerchief, of the finest
cambric, trimmed with costly lace, and bearing in one corner the
initials "L. N." beautifully embroidered, and surmounted with a ducal
coronet. The handkerchief was literally soaked in tears.

Rodolph's first impulse was to follow the person from whose hand this
mute evidence of deep woe had fallen, with the view of restoring it,
but, reflecting that such a step might be mistaken for impertinent
curiosity, he determined to preserve it carefully, as the first link in
an adventure he found himself almost involuntarily engaged in, and from
which he augured a painful and melancholy termination. As he returned to
the porteress, he inquired whether a female had not just come
down-stairs.

"A female! No indeed, sir,--it was a fine, tall, slender-looking lady,
not a female, and covered over with a thick black veil. She has come
from M. Bradamanti. Little Tortillard fetched a coach for her, and she
has just driven away in it. What struck me was the impudence of that
little beggar to seat himself behind the coach. I dare say, though, it
was to see where the lady went to, for he is as mischievous as a magpie,
and as prying as a ferret, for all his club-foot."

"So, then," thought Rodolph, "the name and address of this unhappy lady
will soon be known to this imposter, since it is, doubtless, by his
directions she is followed and watched by this imp of an emissary."

"Well, sir, and what do you think of the apartment? Will it suit you?"
inquired Madame Pipelet.

"Nothing could have suited me better. I have taken it, and to-morrow I
shall send in my furniture."

"Well, then, thank God for a good lodger! I am sure it was a lucky
chance for us sent you here."

"I hope you will find it so, madame. I think it is well understood
between us that you undertake to manage all my little domestic matters
for me. I shall come and superintend the removal of my goods. Adieu!"

So saying, Rodolph left the lodge. The results of his visit to the house
in the Rue du Temple were highly important, both as regarded the
solution of the deep mystery he so ardently desired to unravel, and also
as affording a wide field for the exercise of his earnest endeavours to
do good and to prevent evil. After mature calculation, he considered
himself to have achieved the following results:

First, he had ascertained that Mlle. Rigolette was in possession of the
address of Germain, the Schoolmaster's son. Secondly, a young female,
who, from appearances, might unhappily be the Marquise d'Harville, had
made an appointment with the commandant for the morrow,--perhaps to her
own utter ruin and disgrace; and Rodolph had (as we have before
mentioned) numerous reasons for wishing to preserve the honour and peace
of one for whom he felt so lively an interest as he took in all
concerning M. d'Harville. An honest and industrious artisan, crushed by
the deepest misery, was, with his whole family, about to be turned into
the streets through the means of Bras Rouge. Further, Rodolph had
undesignedly caught a glimpse of an adventure in which the charlatan
César Bradamanti (possibly Polidori) and a female, evidently of rank and
fashion, were the principal actors. And, finally, La Chouette, having
lately quitted the hospital, where she had been since the affair in the
Allée des Veuves, had reappeared on the stage, and was evidently engaged
in some underhand proceedings with the fortune-teller and female
money-lender who occupied the second floor of the house.

Having carefully noted down all these particulars, Rodolph returned to
his house, Rue Plumet, deferring till the following day his visit to the
notary, Jacques Ferrand.

It will be no doubt fresh in the memory of our readers, that on this
same evening Rodolph was engaged to be present at a grand ball given by
the ambassador of ----. Before following our hero in this new excursion,
let us cast a retrospective glance on Tom and Sarah,--personages of the
greatest importance in the development of this history.




CHAPTER XXV.

TOM AND SARAH.


Sarah Seyton, widow of Count Macgregor, and at this time thirty-six or
thirty-seven years of age, was of an excellent Scotch family, daughter
of a baronet, and a country gentleman. Beautiful and accomplished, an
orphan at seventeen years old, she had left Scotland with her brother,
Thomas Seyton of Halsbury. The absurd predictions of an old Highland
nurse had excited almost to madness the two leading vices in Sarah's
character,--pride and ambition; the destiny predicted for her, and in
which she fully believed, was of the highest order,--in fact, sovereign
rank. The prophecy had been so often repeated, that the young Scotch
girl eventually fully credited its fulfilment; and she constantly
repeated to herself, to bear out her ambitious dream, that a
fortune-teller had thus promised a crown to the handsome and excellent
creature who afterwards sat on the throne of France, and who was queen
as much by her graces and her kind heart as others have been by their
grandeur and majesty.

Strange to say, Thomas Seyton, as superstitious as his sister,
encouraged her foolish hopes, and resolved on devoting his life to the
realisation of Sarah's dream,--a dream as dazzling as it was deceptive.
However, the brother and sister were not so blind as to believe
implicitly in this Highland prophecy, and to look absolutely for a
throne of the first rank in a splendid disdain of secondary royalties or
reigning principalities; on the contrary, so that the handsome Scotch
lassie should one day encircle her imperial forehead with a sovereign
crown, the haughty pair agreed to condescend to shut their eyes to the
importance of the throne they coveted. By the assistance of the
_Almanach de Gotha_ for the year of grace 1819, Seyton arranged, before
he left Scotland, a sort of synopsis of the ages of all the kings and
ruling powers in Europe then unmarried.

Although very ridiculous, yet the brother and sister's ambition was
freed from all shameful modes; Seyton was prepared to aid his sister
Sarah in snatching at the thread of the conjugal band by which she hoped
eventually to fasten a crown upon her brows. He would be her
participator in any and all stratagems which could tend to consummate
this end; but he would rather have killed his sister than see her the
mistress of a prince, even though the _liaison_ should terminate in a
marriage of reparation.

The matrimonial inventory that resulted from Seyton and Sarah's
researches in the _Almanach de Gotha_ was satisfactory. The Germanic
Confederation furnished forth a numerous contingent of young presumptive
sovereigns. Seyton was not ignorant of the sort of German wedlock which
is called a "left-handed marriage," to which, as being legitimate to a
certain extent, he would, as a last resource, have resigned his sister.
To Germany, then, it was resolved to bend their steps, in order to
commence this search for the royal spouse.

If the project appears improbable, such hopes ridiculous, let us first
reply by saying that unbridled ambition, excited by superstitious
belief, rarely claims for itself the light of reason in its enterprises,
and will dare the wildest impossibilities; yet, when we recall certain
events, even in our own times, from high and most reputable morganatic
marriages between sovereigns and female subjects, down to the loving
elopement of Miss Penelope Smith and the Prince of Capua, we cannot
refuse some chance of fortunate result to the imagination of Seyton and
Sarah. Let us add that the lady united to a very lovely person, singular
abilities and very varied talents; whilst there were added a power of
seduction the more dangerous as it was united to a mind unbending and
calculating, a disposition cunning and selfish, a deep hypocrisy, a
stubborn and despotic will,--all covered by the outward show of a
generous, warm, and impassioned nature.

In her appearance, there was as much deceit as in her mind. Her full and
dark eyes, now sparkling, now languishing, beneath her coal black brow,
could well dissimulate all the warmth of love and desire. Yet the
burning impulses of love never throbbed beneath her icy bosom; no
surprise of the heart or of the senses ever intervened to disturb the
cold and pitiless calculations of this woman,--crafty, selfish, and
ambitious. When she reached the Continent, she resolved, in accordance
with her brother's advice, not to commence her conjugal and regal
campaign until she had resided some time in Paris, where she determined
to complete her education, and rub off the rust of her native country,
by associating with a society which was embellished by all that was
elegant, tasteful, and refined. Sarah was introduced into the best
society and the highest circles, thanks to the letters of recommendation
and considerate patronage of the English "ambassador's" lady and the old
Marquis d'Harville, who had known Tom and Sarah's father in England.

Persons of deceitful, calculating, and cold dispositions acquire with
great facility language and manners quite in opposition to their natural
character, as with them all is outside, surface, appearance, varnish,
bark; or they soon find that, if their real characters are detected,
they are undone; so, thanks to the sort of instinct of self-preservation
with which they are gifted, they feel all the necessity of the moral
mask, and so paint and costume themselves with all the alacrity and
skill of a practised comedian. Thus, after six months' residence in
Paris, Sarah was in a condition to contest with the most Parisian of
Parisian women, as to the piquant finish of her wit, the charm of her
liveliness, the ingenuousness of her flirtation, and the exciting
simplicity of her looks, at once chaste and passionate.

Finding his sister in full panoply for his campaign, Seyton left with
her for Germany, furnished with the best letters of introduction. The
first state of the German Confederation which headed Sarah's "road-book"
was the Grand Duchy of Gerolstein, thus styled in the diplomatic and
infallible _Almanach de Gotha_ for the year of grace 1819:

   "_Genealogy of the Sovereigns of Europe and their Families_.

                           "GEROLSTEIN.

   "Grand Duke: MAXIMILIAN RODOLPH, 10th December, 1764. Succeeded
   his father, CHARLES FREDERIC RODOLPH, 21st April, 1785. Widower
   January, 1808, by decease of his wife, LOUISA AMELIA, daughter
   of JOHN AUGUSTUS, Prince of BURGLEN.

   "_Son_: GUSTAVUS RODOLPH, born 17th April, 1803.

   "_Mother_: Dowager Grand Duchess Judith, widow of the Grand
   Duke, CHARLES FREDERIC RODOLPH, 21st April, 1785."

Seyton, with much practical good sense, had first noted down on his list
the youngest princes whom he coveted as brothers-in-law, thinking that
extreme youth is more easily seduced than ripened age. Moreover, we have
already said that the brother and sister were particularly recommended
to the reigning Duke of Gerolstein by the old Marquis d'Harville,
caught, like the rest of the world, by Sarah, whose beauty, grace, and,
above all, delightful manners, he could not sufficiently admire.

It is superfluous to say that the presumptive heir of the Grand Duchy of
Gerolstein was Gustavus Rodolph: he was hardly eighteen when Tom and
Sarah were presented to his father. The arrival of the young Scotch
lady was an event in the German court, so quiet, simple, and almost
patriarchal in its habits and observances. The Grand Duke, a most worthy
gentleman, governed his states with wise firmness and paternal kindness.
Nothing could exceed the actual and moral happiness of the principality,
whose laborious and steady population, by their soberness and piety,
presented a pure specimen of the German character. This excellent people
enjoyed so much real felicity, and were so perfectly contented with
their condition, that the enlightened care of the Grand Duke was not
much called into action to preserve them from the mania of
constitutional innovations. As far as modern discovery went, and those
practical suggestions which have a wholesome influence over the
well-being and morals of his people, the Grand Duke was always anxious
to acquire knowledge himself, and apply it invariably for the use and
benefit of his people, his residents at the capitals of the different
states of Europe having little else to occupy themselves whilst on their
mission but to keep their master fully informed as to the rise and
progress of science and all the arts which are connected with public
welfare and public utility.

We have said that the Duke felt as much affection as gratitude for the
old Marquis d'Harville, who, in 1815, had rendered him immense service;
and so, thanks to his powerful recommendation, Sarah of Halsbury and her
brother were received at the court of Gerolstein with every distinction,
and with marked kindness. A fortnight after her arrival, the young
Scotch girl, endued with so profound a spirit of observation, had easily
penetrated the firm character and open heart of the Grand Duke. Before
she began to seduce his son,--a thing of course,--she had wisely
resolved to discover the disposition of the father. Although he had
appeared to dote on his son, she was yet fully convinced that this
father, with all his tenderness, would never swerve from certain
principles, certain ideas as to the duty of princes, and would never
consent to what he would consider a _mésalliance_ for his son, and that
not through pride, but from conscience, reason, and dignity. A man of
this firm mould, and the more affectionate and good in proportion as he
is firm and determined, never abates one jot of that which affects his
conscience, his reason, and his dignity.

Sarah was on the point of renouncing her enterprise in the face of
obstacles so insurmountable; but, reflecting that, as Rodolph was very
young, and his gentleness and goodness, his character at once timid and
meditative, were generally spoken of, she thought she might find
compensation in the feeble and irresolute disposition of the young
prince, and therefore persisted in her project, and again revived her
hopes.

On this new essay, the management of herself and brother were most
masterly. The young lady knew full well how to propitiate all around
her, and particularly the persons who might have been jealous or envious
of her accomplishments, and she caused her beauty and grace to be
forgotten beneath the veil of modest simplicity with which she covered
them. She soon became the idol, not only of the Grand Duke, but of his
mother, the Dowager Grand Duchess Judith, who, in spite of, or through,
her ninety years of age, loved to excess every thing that was young and
charming.

Sarah and her brother often talked of their departure, but the sovereign
of Gerolstein would never consent to it; and that he might completely
attach the two to him, he pressed on Sir Thomas Seyton the acceptance of
the vacant post of his "first groom of the chamber," and entreated Sarah
not to quit the Grand Duchess Judith, as she could not do without her.
After much hesitation, overcome by the most pressing entreaties, Sarah
and Seyton accepted such brilliant offers, and decided on establishing
themselves at the court of Gerolstein, where they had been for two
months.

Sarah, who was an accomplished musician, knowing the taste of the Grand
Duchess for the old masters, and, above all, for Gluck, sent for the
_chef-d'oeuvre_ of this attractive composer, and fascinated the old
princess by her unfailing complaisance, as well as the remarkable skill
with which she sang those old airs, so beautiful in their melody, so
expressive in their character.

As for Seyton, he knew how to make himself very useful in the occupation
which had been conferred upon him. He was a good judge of horses, was
orderly and firm in his conduct and arrangements, and so, in a short
time, completely remodelled the stables of the Grand Duke, which, up to
that time, had been neglected, and become disorganised.

The brother and sister were soon equally beloved, fêted, and admired in
this court. The master's preference soon commands the preference of
those below him. Sarah required, in aid of her future projects, too much
aid not to employ her insinuating powers in acquiring partisans. Her
hypocrisy, clothed in most attractive shapes, easily deluded the
simple-hearted Germans, and the general feeling soon authorised the
extreme kindness of the Grand Duke.

Thus, then, our designing pair were established at the court of
Gerolstein, agreeably and securely placed without any reference to
Rodolph. By a lucky chance, some days after the arrival of Sarah, the
young prince had gone away to the inspection of troops, with an
aide-de-camp and the faithful Murphy. This absence, doubly auspicious to
the views of Sarah, allowed her to arrange at her ease the principal
threads of the fillet she was weaving, without being deterred by the
presence of the young prince, whose too open admiration might, perhaps,
have awakened the suspicions of the Grand Duke. On the contrary, in the
absence of his son, he did not, unfortunately, reflect that he was
admitting into the closest intimacy a young girl of surpassing beauty,
and of lively wit, as Rodolph must discover at every moment of the day.

Sarah was perfectly insensible to a reception so kind and generous,--to
the full confidence with which she was introduced into the very heart of
this sovereign family. Neither brother nor sister paused for a moment in
their bad designs; they determined upon a principle to bring trouble and
annoyance into this peaceable and happy court; they calmly calculated
the probable results of the cruel divisions they should establish
between a father and son, up to that period so tenderly united.

       *       *       *       *       *

A few words concerning Rodolph's early days may be necessary. During his
infancy, he had been extremely delicate. His father reasoned thereon in
this strange manner: "English country gentlemen are generally remarkable
for their robust health. This advantage results generally from their
bodily training, which is simple, rural, and develops their full vigour.
Rodolph must leave the hands of women; his temperament is delicate, and,
perhaps, by accustoming this child to live like the son of an English
farmer (with some few exceptions), I shall strengthen his constitution."

The Grand Duke sent to England for a man worthy of the trust, and
capable of directing such a course of bodily culture, and Sir Walter
Murphy, an athletic specimen, of a Yorkshire country gentleman, was
entrusted with this important charge. The direction which he gave to the
mind and body of the young prince were such as entirely coincided with
the views and wishes of the Grand Duke. Murphy and his pupil lived for
many years in a beautiful farmhouse, situated in the midst of woods and
fields, some leagues from the capital of Gerolstein, and in a most
picturesque and salubrious spot. Rodolph, free from all etiquette, and
employed with Murphy in outdoor labour proportionate to his age, lived
the sober, manly, and regular life of the country, having for his
pleasure and amusement the violent exercises of wrestling, pugilism,
riding on horseback, and hunting. In the midst of the pure air of the
meadows, woods, and mountains, he underwent an entire change, and grew
up as vigorous as a young oak; his pale cheek became suffused with the
ruddy glow of health; always lithe and active, he underwent now the most
severe fatigues, his address, energy, and courage supplying what was
deficient in his muscular power; so that, when only in his fifteenth or
sixteenth year, he was always the conqueror in his contests with young
men his superiors in age.

His scientific education necessarily suffered from the preference given
to his physical training, and Rodolph's knowledge was very limited; but
the Grand Duke very wisely reflected that, to have a well-informed mind,
it must be supported by a strong physical frame, and that, this
acquired, the intellectual faculties would develop themselves the more
rapidly.

The kind Walter Murphy was by no means a sage, and could only convey to
Rodolph some primary instruction; but no one knew better than he how to
inspire his pupil with the feeling of what is just, loyal, and generous,
and a horror of every thing that was mean, low, and contemptible. These
repugnances, these powerful and wholesome admonitions, took deep and
lasting root in the very soul of Rodolph; and although, in after life,
these principles were violently shaken by the storm of passions, yet
they were never eradicated from his heart. The levin bolt strikes,
splits, and rends the deeply planted tree; but the sap still maintains
its hold in the roots, and a thousand green branches spring fresh from
what was taken for a withered and dead tree.

Murphy, then, gave to Rodolph, if we may use the expression, health to
both body and mind; he made him robust, active, and daring, with a love
for all that was good and right, and a hatred for whatsoever was wicked
and bad. Having fulfilled his task to admiration, the squire, called to
England on very important business, left Germany for some time, to the
great regret of Rodolph, who loved him extremely.

His son's health having been so satisfactorily established, the Grand
Duke turned his most serious attention to the mental education of his
dearly beloved son. A certain Doctor César Polidori, a renowned
linguist, a distinguished chemist, learned historian, and deeply versed
in the study of all the exact and physical sciences, was entrusted with
the charge of cultivating and improving the rich but virgin soil so
carefully and well prepared by Murphy. This time the Grand Duke's choice
was a most unfortunate one, or, rather, his religious feelings were
infamously imposed upon by the person who introduced the doctor to him,
and caused him to think on Polidori as the preceptor of the young
prince. Atheist, cheat, and hypocrite, full of stratagem and trick,
concealing the most dangerous immorality, the most hardened scepticism,
under an austere exterior, profoundly versed in the knowledge of human
nature, or, rather, only having tried the worst side,--the disgraceful
passions of humanity,--Doctor Polidori was the most hateful Mentor that
could have been entrusted with the education of a young man.

Rodolph left with the deepest regrets the independent and animating life
which he had hitherto led with Murphy to go and become pale with the
study of books, and submit himself to the irksome ceremonies of his
father's court, and he at once entertained a strong prejudice against
his tutor. It could not be otherwise.

On quitting his young friend, the poor squire had compared him, and with
justice, to a young wild colt, full of grace and fire, carried off from
his native prairies, where he had dwelt, free as air, and joyous as a
bird, to be bridled and spurred, that he might under that system learn
how to moderate and economise those powers which, hitherto, he had only
employed in running and leaping in any way he pleased.

Rodolph began by telling Polidori that he had no taste for study, but
that he greatly preferred the free exercise of his arms and legs, to
breathe the pure air of the fields, to traverse the woods and the
mountains, and that a good horse and a good gun were preferable to all
the books in the universe. The doctor was prepared for this antipathy,
and was secretly delighted at it, for, in another way, the hopes of this
man were as ambitious as those of Sarah. Although the grand duchy of
Gerolstein was only a secondary state, Polidori indulged the idea of
being one day its Richelieu, and of making Rodolph play the part of the
do-nothing prince. But, desirous above all things of currying favour
with his pupil, and of making him forget Murphy, by his own concession
and compliance, he concealed from the Grand Duke the young prince's
repugnance for study, and boasted of his application to, and rapid
progress in, his studies; whilst some examinations arranged between
himself and Rodolph, which had the air of being impromptu questions,
confirmed the Grand Duke in his blind and implicit confidence. By
degrees the dislike which Rodolph at first entertained for the doctor
changed, on the young prince's part, into a cool familiarity, very
unlike the real attachment he had for Murphy. By degrees, he found
himself leagued with Polidori (although from very innocent causes) by
the same ties that unite two guilty persons. Sooner or later, Rodolph
was sure to despise a man of the age and character of the doctor, who so
unworthily lied to excuse the idleness of his pupil. This Polidori knew;
but he also knew that if we do not at once sever our connections with
corrupt minds in disgust, by degrees, and in spite of our better reason,
we become familiar with and too frequently admire them, until,
insensibly, we hear without shame or reproach those things mocked at and
vituperated which we formerly loved and revered. Besides, the doctor
was too cunning all at once to shock certain noble sentiments and
convictions which Rodolph had derived from the admirable lessons of
Murphy. After having vented much raillery on the coarseness of the early
occupations of his young pupil, the doctor, laying aside his thin mask
of austerity, had greatly aroused the curiosity and heated the fancy of
the young prince, by the exaggerated descriptions, strongly drawn and
deeply coloured, of the pleasures and gallantries which had illustrated
the reigns of Louis XIV., the Regent, and especially Louis XV., the hero
of César Polidori. He assured the misled boy, who listened to him with a
fatal earnestness, that pleasures, however excessive, far from
demoralising a highly accomplished prince, often made him merciful and
generous, inasmuch as fine minds are never more predisposed to
benevolence and clemency than when acted upon by their own enjoyments.
Louis XV., the _bien aimé_, the well-beloved, was an unanswerable proof
of this. And then, added the doctor, how entirely have the greatest men
of all ages and all countries abandoned themselves to the most refined
epicureanism,--from Alcibiades to Maurice of Saxony, from Anthony to the
great Condé, from Cæsar to Vendome! Such conversations must make deep
and dangerous impressions on a young, ardent, and virgin mind, and such
theories could not be without their results.

In the midst of this well regulated and virtuous court, accustomed,
after the example of its ruler, to honest pleasures and harmless
amusements, Rodolph, instructed by Polidori, dreamt of the dissipated
nights of Versailles, the orgies of Choisy, the attractive
voluptuousness of the Parc-au-Cerfs, and also, from time to time, of
some romantic amours contrasting with these. Neither had the doctor
failed to prove to Rodolph that a prince of the Germanic Confederation
should not have any military pretension beyond sending his contingent to
the Diet. The feeling of the time was not warlike. According to the
doctor, to pass his time delightfully and idly amongst women and the
refinements of luxury,--to repose from time to time from the animation
of sensual pleasures, amidst the delightful attractions of the fine
arts,--to hunt occasionally, not as a Nimrod, but as an intelligent
epicurean, and enjoy the transitory fatigues which make idleness and
repose taste but the sweeter,--this, this was the only life which a
prince should think of enjoying, who (and this was his height of
happiness) could find a prime minister capable of devoting himself
boldly to the distressing and overwhelming burden of state affairs.

Rodolph, in abandoning himself to ideas which were free from
criminality, because they did not spring from the circle of fatal
probabilities, resolved that when Providence should call to himself the
Grand Duke, his father, he would devote himself to the life which César
Polidori had painted to him under such brilliant and attractive colours,
and to have as his prime minister one whose knowledge and understanding
he admired, and whose blind complaisance he fully appreciated. It is
useless to say that the young prince kept the most perfect silence upon
the subject of those pernicious hopes which had been excited within him.
Knowing that the heroes of the Grand Duke's admiration were Gustavus
Adolphus, Charles XII., and the great Frederic (Maximilian Rodolph had
the honour of belonging to the royal house of Brandenburg), Rodolph
thought, reasonably enough, that the prince, his father, who professed
so profound an admiration for these king-captains, always booted and
spurred, continually mounted on their chargers, and engaged in making
war, would consider his son out of his senses if he believed him capable
of wishing to displace the Tudescan gravity of his court by the
introduction of the light and licentious manners of the Regency.

A year--eighteen months--passed away. At the end of this time Murphy
returned from England, and wept for joy on again embracing his young
pupil. After a few days, although unable to discover the reason of a
change which so deeply afflicted him, the worthy squire found Rodolph
chilled and constrained in his demeanour towards him, and almost rude
when he recalled to him his sequestered and rural life. Assured of the
natural kind heart of the young prince, and warned by a secret
presentiment, Murphy thought him for a time perverted by the pernicious
influence of Doctor Polidori, whom he instinctively abhorred, and
resolved to watch very narrowly. The doctor, for his part, was very much
annoyed by Murphy's return, for he feared his frankness, good sense, and
keen penetration. He instantly resolved, therefore, cost what it might,
to ruin the worthy Englishman in Rodolph's estimation. It was at this
crisis that Seyton and Sarah were presented and received at the court of
Gerolstein with such extreme distinction. We have said that Rodolph,
accompanied by Murphy, had been absent from the court on a journey for
some weeks. During this absence the doctor was by no means idle. It is
said that intriguers discover and recognise each other by certain
mysterious signs, which allow of them observing each other until their
interests decide them to form a close alliance, or declare unremitting
hostility.

Some days after the establishment of Sarah and her brother at the court
of the Grand Duke, Polidori became a close ally of Seyton's. The doctor
confessed to himself, with delectable cynicism, that he felt a natural
affinity for rogues and villains, and so he said that without pretending
to discover the end which Sarah and her brother desired to achieve, he
was attracted towards them by a sympathy so strong as to lead him to
imagine that they plotted some devilish purpose. Some questions of
Seyton's as to the disposition and early life of Rodolph, questions
which would have passed without notice with a person less awake to all
that occurred than the doctor, in a moment enlightened him as to the
ulterior aims of the brother and sister; all he doubted was, that the
aspirations of the Scotch lady were at the same time honourable as well
as ambitious. The arrival of this lovely young woman appeared to
Polidori a godsend. Rodolph's mind was already inflamed with amorous
imaginings; Sarah might become, or be made, the delicious reality which
should substantiate so many glorious dreams. It was not to be doubted
but that she would secure an immense influence over a heart submitted to
the witching spell of a first love. The doctor instantly laid his plan
to direct and secure this influence, and to make it serve also as the
means of destroying Murphy's power and reputation. Like a skilful
intriguer, he soon informed the aspiring pair that they must come to an
understanding with him, as he alone was responsible to the Grand Duke
for the private life of the young prince.

Sarah and her brother understood him in a moment, although they had not
told the doctor a syllable of their secret designs. On the return of
Rodolph and Murphy, all three, combined by one common intent, tacitly
leagued against the squire, their most redoubtable enemy.

       *       *       *       *       *

What was to happen did happen. Rodolph saw Sarah daily after his return,
and became desperately enamoured. She soon told him that she shared his
love, although she foresaw that this love would create great trouble. He
could never be happy; the distance that separated them was too wide! She
then recommended to Rodolph the most profound discretion, for fear of
arousing the Grand Duke's suspicions, as he would be inexorable, and
deprive them of their only happiness,--that of seeing each other every
day. The young prince promised to be cautious, and conceal his love. The
Scotch maiden was too ambitious, too self-possessed, to compromise and
betray herself in the eyes of the court; and Rodolph, perceiving the
necessity of dissimulation, imitated Sarah's prudence. The lovers'
secret was carefully preserved for some time; nor was it until the
brother and sister saw the unbridled passion of their dupe reach its
utmost excess, and that his infatuation, which he could hardly restrain,
threatened to burst forth afresh, and destroy all, that they resolved on
their final _coup_. The doctor's character authorising the confidence,
besides the morality which invested it, Seyton opened to him on the
necessity of a marriage between Rodolph and Sarah; otherwise, he added,
with perfect sincerity, he and his sister would instantly leave
Gerolstein. Sarah participated in the prince's affection, but,
preferring death to dishonour, she could only be the wife of his
highness.

This exalted flight of ambition stupefied the doctor, who had never
imagined that Sarah's imagination soared so high. A marriage surrounded
by numberless difficulties and dangers appeared impossible to Polidori,
and he frankly told Seyton the reasons why the Grand Duke would never
submit to such a union. Seyton agreed in the importance of the reasons,
but proposed, as a _mezzo termini_ which should meet all objections, a
marriage, which, although secret, should be legal, and only avowed after
the decease of the Grand Duke. Sarah was of a noble and ancient house,
and such a union was not without precedent. Seyton gave the prince eight
days to decide; his sister could not longer endure the cruel anguish of
uncertainty, and, if she must renounce Rodolph's love, she must act up
to her painful resolve as promptly as might be.

Certain that he could not mistake Sarah's views, the doctor was sorely
perplexed. He had three ways before him,--to inform the Grand Duke of
the matrimonial project, to open Rodolph's eyes as to the manoeuvres
of Tom and Sarah, to lend himself to the marriage. But to inform the
Grand Duke would be to alienate from him for ever the heir presumptive
to the throne. To enlighten Rodolph on the interested views of Sarah was
to expose himself to the reception which a lover is sure to give when
she whom he loves is depreciated in his eyes; and then, what a blow for
the vanity or the heart of the young prince, to let him know that it was
for his royal rank alone that the lady was desirous to wed him! On the
other hand, by lending himself to this match, Polidori bound Rodolph and
Sarah to him by a tie of the strongest gratitude, or, at least, by the
complicity of a dangerous act. No doubt, all might be discovered, and
the doctor exposed to the anger of the Grand Duke, but then the marriage
would have been concluded, the union legal. The storm would blow over,
and the future sovereign of Gerolstein would become the more bound to
Polidori, in proportion as the doctor had undergone greater dangers in
his service. After much consideration, therefore, he resolved on serving
Sarah, but with a certain qualification, which we will presently refer
to.

Rodolph's passion had reached a height almost of frenzy. Violently
excited by constraint, and the skilful management of Sarah, who
pretended to feel still more than he did the insurmountable obstacles
which honour and duty placed between them and their liberty, in a few
days more the young prince would have betrayed himself. Thus, when the
doctor proposed that he must never see his enchantress again, or possess
her by a secret marriage, Rodolph threw himself on Polidori's neck,
called him his saviour, his friend, his father; he only wished that the
temple and the priest were at hand, that he might marry her that
instant. The doctor resolved (for reasons of his own) to undertake the
management of all. He found a priest,--witnesses; and the union (all the
formalities of which were carefully scrutinised and verified by Seyton)
was secretly celebrated during a temporary absence of the Grand Duke at
a conference of the German Diet. The prophecy of the Scotch soothsayer
was fulfilled,--Sarah wedded the heir to a throne.

Without quenching the fire of his love, possession rendered Rodolph more
circumspect, and cooled down that violence which might have compromised
the secret of his passion for Sarah; but, directed by Seyton and the
doctor, the young couple managed so well, and observed so much
circumspection towards each other, that they eluded all detection.

An event, impatiently desired by Sarah, soon turned this calm into a
tempest,--she was about to become a mother. It was then that this woman
evinced all those exactions which were so new to, and so much
astonished, Rodolph. She protested, with hypocritical tears streaming
from her eyes, that she could no longer support the constraint in which
she lived; a constraint rendered the more insupportable by her
pregnancy. In this extremity she boldly proposed to the young prince to
tell all to his father, who was, as well as the Dowager Grand Duchess,
fonder than ever of her. No doubt, she added, he will be very angry,
greatly enraged, at first, but he loves his son so tenderly, so blindly,
and had for her (Sarah) so strong an affection, that his paternal anger
would gradually subside, and she would at last take in the court of
Gerolstein the rank which was due to her, she might say in a double
sense, because she was about to give birth to a child, which would be
the heir presumptive to the Grand Duke. These pretensions alarmed
Rodolph: he knew the deep attachment which his father had for him, but
he also well knew the inflexibility of his principles with regard to all
the duties of a prince. To all these objections Sarah replied, unmoved:

"I am your wife in the presence of God and men. In a short time, I shall
no longer be able to conceal my situation; and I ought not to blush at
that of which I am, on the contrary, so proud, and would desire openly
to acknowledge."

The expectation of posterity had redoubled Rodolph's tenderness for
Sarah, and, placed between the desire to accede to her wishes and the
dread of his father's wrath, he experienced the bitterest anguish.
Seyton sided with his sister.

"The marriage is indissoluble," said he to his royal brother-in-law;
"the Grand Duke may exile you from his court,--you and your
wife,--nothing more; but he loves you too much to have recourse to such
an extremity. He will endure what he cannot prevent."

These reasons, strong enough in themselves, did not soothe Rodolph's
anxieties. At this juncture, Seyton was charged by the Grand Duke with
an errand to visit several breeding studs in Austria. This mission,
which he could not refuse, would only detain him a fortnight: he set out
with much regret, and in a very important moment for his sister. She was
chagrined, yet satisfied, at the departure of her brother; for she would
lose his advice, but then he would be safe from the Grand Duke's anger
if all were discovered. Sarah promised to keep Seyton fully informed,
day by day, of the progress of events, so important to both of them;
and, that they might correspond more surely and secretly, they agreed
upon a cipher, of which Polidori also held the key. This precaution
alone proves that Sarah had other matters to tell her brother of besides
her love for Rodolph. In truth, this selfish, cold, ambitious woman had
not felt the ice of her heart melt even by the beams of the passionate
love which had been breathed to her. Her maternity was only with her a
means of acting more effectually on Rodolph, and had no softening effect
on her iron soul. The youth, headlong love, and inexperience of the
prince, who was hardly more than a child, and so perfidiously ensnared
into an inextricable position, hardly excited an interest in the mind of
this selfish creature; and, in her confidential communications with him,
she complained, with disdain and bitterness, of the weakness of this
young man, who trembled before the most paternal of German princes, who
lived, however, very long! In a word, this correspondence between the
brother and sister clearly developed their unbounded selfishness, their
ambitious calculations, their impatience, which almost amounted to
homicide, and laid bare the springs of that dark conspiracy crowned by
the marriage of Rodolph. One of Sarah's letters to her brother was
abstracted by Polidori, the channel of their mutual communications; for
what purpose we shall see hereafter.

A few days after Seyton's departure, Sarah was at the evening court of
the Dowager Grand Duchess. Many of the ladies present looked at her with
an astonished air, and whispered to their neighbours. The Grand Duchess
Judith, in spite of her ninety years, had a quick ear and a sharp eye,
and this little whispering did not escape her. She made a sign to one of
the ladies in waiting to come to her, and from her she learned that
everybody was remarking that the figure of Miss Sarah Seyton of Halsbury
was less slender, less delicate in its proportions than usual. The old
princess adored her young protégée and would have answered to God
himself for Sarah's virtue. Indignant at the malevolence of these
remarks, she shrugged her shoulders, and said aloud, from the end of the
saloon in which she was sitting:

"My dear Sarah, come here."

Sarah rose. It was requisite to cross the circle to reach the place
where the princess was seated, who was anxious most kindly to destroy
the rumour that was circulated, and, by the simple fact of thus crossing
the room, confound her calumniators, and prove triumphantly that the
fair proportions of her protégée had lost not one jot of their symmetry
and delicacy. Alas! the most perfidious enemy could not have devised a
better plan than that suggested by the worthy princess in her desire to
defend her protégée. Sarah came towards her, and it required all the
deep respect due to the Grand Duchess to repress the murmur of surprise
and indignation when the young lady crossed the room. The
nearest-sighted persons saw what Sarah would no longer conceal, for her
pregnancy might have been hidden longer had she but have chosen; but the
ambitious woman had sought this display in order to compel Rodolph to
declare his marriage. The Grand Duchess, who, however, would not be
convinced in spite of her eyesight, said, in a low voice, to Sarah:

"My dear child, how very ill you have dressed yourself to-day,--you,
whose shape may be spanned by ten fingers. I hardly know you again."

We will relate hereafter the results of this discovery, which led to
great and terrible events. At this moment, we will content ourselves
with stating, what the reader has no doubt already guessed, that
Fleur-de-Marie was the fruit of the secret marriage of Rodolph and
Sarah, and that they both believed their daughter dead.

It has not been forgotten that Rodolph, after having visited the house
in the Rue du Temple, had returned home, and intended, in the evening,
to be present at a ball given by the ---- ambassadress. It was to this
fête that we shall follow his royal highness, the reigning Grand Duke of
Gerolstein, Gustavus Rodolph, travelling in France under the name of the
Count de Duren.




CHAPTER XXVI.

THE BALL.


As the eleventh hour of the night sounded from the different clocks in
Paris, the gates of an hôtel in the Rue Plumet were thrown open by a
Swiss in rich livery, and forthwith issued a magnificent dark blue
Berlin carriage, drawn by two superb long-tailed gray horses; on the
seat, which was covered by a rich hammercloth, trimmed with a mossy silk
fringe, sat a portly-looking coachman, whose head was ornamented by a
three-cornered hat, while his rotund figure looked still more imposing
in his dress livery-coat of blue cloth, trimmed up the seams with silver
lace, and thickly braided with the same material; the whole finished by
a splendid sable collar and cuffs. Behind the carriage stood a tall
powdered lacquey, dressed in a livery of blue turned up with yellow and
silver; and by his side was a chasseur, whose fierce-looking moustaches,
gaily embroidered dress and hat, half concealed by a waving plume of
blue and yellow feathers, completed a most imposing _coup-d'oeil_.

The bright light of the lamps revealed the costly satin lining of the
interior of the vehicle we are describing, in which were seated Rodolph,
having on his right hand the Baron de Graün, and opposite to him the
faithful Murphy.

Out of deference for the sovereign represented by the ambassador to
whose ball he was then proceeding, Rodolph wore no other mark of
distinction than the diamond order of ----.

Round the neck of Sir Walter Murphy, and suspended by a broad orange
riband, hung the enamelled cross of the grand commander of the Golden
Eagle of Gerolstein; and a similar insignia decorated the Baron de
Graün, amidst an infinite number of the crosses and badges of honour
belonging to all countries, depending by a gold chain placed in the two
full buttonholes of the diplomatist's coat.

"I am delighted," said Rodolph, "with the very favourable accounts I
have received from Madame Georges respecting my poor little protégée at
the farm of Bouqueval. David's care and attention have worked wonders.
Apropos of La Goualeuse: what do you think, Sir Walter Murphy, any of
your Cité acquaintances would say at seeing you so strangely disguised,
as at present they would consider you, most valiant charcoal-man, to be?
They would be somewhat astonished, I fancy."

"Much in the same degree as the surprise your royal highness would
excite among your new acquaintances in the Rue du Temple, were you to
proceed thither, as now attired, to pay a friendly visit to Madame
Pipelet, and to inquire after the health of Cabrion's victim, the poor
melancholy Alfred!"

"My lord has drawn so lively a sketch of Alfred, attired in his
long-skirted green coat and bell-crowned hat," said the baron, "that I
can well imagine him seated in magisterial dignity in his dark and smoky
lodge. Let me hope that your royal highness's visit to the Rue du Temple
has fully answered your expectations, and that you are in every way
satisfied with the researches of my agent?"

"Perfectly so," answered Rodolph. "My success was even beyond my
expectations."

Then, after a moment's painful silence, and to drive away the train of
thought conjured up by the recollection of the probable guilt of Madame
d'Harville, he resumed, in a tone more gay:

"I am almost ashamed to own to so much childishness, but I confess
myself amused with the contrast between my treating Madame Pipelet in
the morning to a glass of cordial, and then proceeding in the evening to
a grand fête, with all the pomp and prestige of one of those privileged
beings who, by the grace of God, 'reign over this lower world.' Some men
of small fortune would speak of my revenues as those of a millionaire,"
added Rodolph, in a sort of parenthesis, alluding to the limited extent
of his estates.

"And many millionaires, my lord, might not have the rare, the admirable
good sense, of the man of narrow means."

"Ah, my dear De Graün, you are really too good, much too good! You
really overwhelm me," replied Rodolph, with an ironical smile, while the
baron glanced at Murphy with the consciousness of a man who has just
discovered he has been saying a foolish thing.

"Really, my dear De Graün," resumed Rodolph, "I know not how to
acknowledge the weight of your compliment, or how to repay such delicate
flattery in its own way."

"My lord, let me entreat of you not to take the trouble," exclaimed the
baron, who had for the instant forgotten that Rodolph, who detested
every species of flattery, always revenged himself by the most unsparing
raillery on those who, directly or indirectly, addressed it to him.

"Nay, baron, I cannot allow myself to remain in your debt. You have
praised my understanding,--I will, in return, admire your countenance;
for by my honour, as I sit beside you, you look like a youth of twenty.
Antinous himself could not boast of finer features, or a more
captivating expression."

"My lord! my lord! I cry your mercy!"

"Behold him, Murphy, and say whether Apollo could display more graceful
limbs, more light, and youthful proportions!"

"I beseech you, my lord, to pardon me, from the recollection of how long
it is since I have permitted myself to utter the slightest compliment to
your royal highness."

"Observe, Murphy, this band of gold which restrains, without concealing,
the locks of rich black hair flowing over this graceful neck, and--"

"My lord! my lord! for pity's sake spare me! I repent, most sincerely,
of my involuntary fault," said the unfortunate baron, with an expression
of comic despair on his countenance truly ludicrous.

It must not be forgotten that the original of this glowing picture was
at least fifty years of age; his hair gray, frizzled and powdered; a
stiff white cravat round his throat; a pale, withered countenance; and
golden spectacles upon the horny bridge of his sharp, projecting nose.

"Pardon, my lord! pardon, for the baron," exclaimed the squire,
laughing. "I beseech you not to overwhelm him beneath the weight of your
mythological allusions. I will be answerable to your royal highness that
my unlucky friend here will never again venture to utter a flattery,
since so truth is translated in the new vocabulary of Gerolstein."

"What! old Murphy, too? Are you going to join in the rebellion against
sincerity?"

"My lord, I am so sorry for the position of my unfortunate _vis-à-vis_,
that--I beg I may divide his punishment with him."

"Charcoal-man in ordinary, your disinterested friendship does you
honour. But seriously now, my dear De Graün, how have you forgotten that
I only allow such fellows as D'Harneim and his train to flatter, for the
simple reason that they know not how to speak the truth? That
cuckoo-note of false praise belongs to birds of such feather as
themselves, and the species they claim relationship with; but for a
person of your mind and good taste to descend to its usage--oh, fie!
baron, fie!"

"It is all very well, my lord," said the baron, sturdily; "but I must be
allowed to say (with all due apology for my boldness) that there is no
small portion of pride in your royal highness's aversion to receive even
a just compliment."

"Well said, baron! Come, I like you better now you speak plain truths.
But tell me how you prove your assertion?"

"Why, just so, my lord; because you repudiate it upon the same principle
that might induce a beautiful woman, well aware of her charms, to say to
one of her most enthusiastic admirers, 'I know perfectly well how
handsome I am, and therefore your approval is perfectly uncalled for and
unnecessary. What is the use of reiterating what everybody knows? Is it
usual to proclaim in the open streets that the sun shines, when all may
see and feel certain of his midday brightness?'"

"Now, baron, you are shifting your ground, and becoming more dangerous
as you become more adroit; and, by way of varying your punishment, I
will only say that the infernal Polidori himself could not have more
ingeniously disguised the poisonous draught of flattery, when seeking to
persuade some poor victim to swallow it."

"My lord, I am now effectually silenced."

"Then," said Murphy (and this time with an air of real seriousness),
"your royal highness has now no doubt as to its being really Polidori
you encountered in the Rue du Temple?"

"I have ceased to have the least doubt on the subject, since I learned
through you that he had been in Paris for some time past."

"I had forgotten, or, rather, purposely omitted to mention to your
lordship," said Murphy in a sorrowing tone, "a name that never failed to
awaken painful feelings; and knowing as I do how justly odious the
remembrance of this man was to your royal highness, I studiously
abstained from all reference to it."

The features of Rodolph were again overshadowed with gloom, and, plunged
in deep reverie, he continued to preserve unbroken the silence which
prevailed until the carriage stopped in the courtyard of the embassy.
The windows of the hôtel were blazing with a thousand lights, which
shone brightly through the thick darkness of the night, while a crowd of
lacqueys, in full-dress liveries, lined the entrance-hall, extending
even to the salons of reception, where the grooms of the chamber waited
to announce the different arrivals.

M. le Comte ----, the ambassador, with his lady, had purposely remained
in the first reception-room until the arrival of Rodolph, who now
entered, followed by Murphy and M. de Graün.

Rodolph was then in his thirty-sixth year, in the very prime and
perfection of manly health and strength. His regular and handsome
features, with the air of dignity pervading his whole appearance, would
have rendered him, under any circumstances, a strikingly attractive man;
but, combined with the _éclat_ of high birth and exalted rank, he was a
person of first-rate importance in every circle in which he presented
himself, and whose notice was assiduously sought for. Dressed with the
utmost simplicity, Rodolph wore a white waistcoat and cravat; a blue
coat, buttoned up closely, on the right breast of which sparkled a
diamond star, displayed to admiration the light yet perfect proportions
of his graceful figure, while his well-fitting pantaloons, of black
kerseymere, defined the finely formed leg and handsome foot in its
embroidered stocking.

From the rareness of the Grand Duke's visits to the _haut monde_, his
arrival produced a great sensation, and every eye was fixed upon him
from the moment that, attended by Murphy and Baron de Graün, he entered
the first salon at the embassy. An attaché, deputed to watch for his
arrival, hastened immediately to appraise the ambassadress of the
appearance of her illustrious guest. Her excellency instantly hurried,
with her noble husband, to welcome their visitor, exclaiming:

"Your royal highness is, indeed, kind, thus to honour our poor
entertainment."

"Nay, madame," replied Rodolph, gracefully bowing on the hand extended
to him, "your ladyship is well aware of the sincere pleasure it affords
to pay my compliments to yourself; and as for M. le Comte, he and I are
two old friends, who are always delighted to meet. Are we not, my lord?"

"Your royal highness, in deigning to continue to me so flattering a
place in your recollection, makes it still more impossible for me ever
to forget your many acts of condescending kindness."

"I assure you, M. le Comte, that in my memory the past never dies; or,
at least, the pleasant part of it; for I make it a strict rule never to
preserve any reminiscences of my friends but such as are agreeable and
gratifying."

"Your royal highness has found the secret of being happy in your
thoughts, and rendering others so at the same time," rejoined the
ambassador, smiling with gratified pride and pleasure at a conference so
cordially carried on before a gathering crowd of admiring auditors.

"Thus, then, madame," replied Rodolph, "will your flattering reception
of to-night live long in my memory; and I shall promise myself the
happiness of recalling this evening's fête, with its tasteful
arrangements and crowd of attending beauties. Ah, Madame la Comtesse,
who like you can effect such a union of taste and elegance as now
sparkles around us?"

"Your royal highness is too indulgent."

"But I have a very important question to ask you: Why is it that,
lovely as are your fair guests, their charms are never seen to such
perfection as when assembled beneath your hospitable roof?"

"Your royal highness is pleased to view our fair visitants through the
same flattering medium with which you are graciously pleased to behold
our poor endeavours for your and their amusement," answered the
ambassador, with a deferential bow.

"Your pardon, count," replied Rodolph, "if I differ with you in opinion.
According to my judgment, the cause proceeds wholly from our amiable
hostess, Madame l'Ambassadrice."

"May I request of your royal highness to solve this enigma?" inquired
the countess, smiling.

"That is easily given, madame, and may be found in the perfect urbanity
and exquisite grace with which you receive your lovely guests, and
whisper to each a few charming and encouraging words, which, if the
least bit exceeding strict truth," said Rodolph, smiling with
good-tempered satire, "renders those who are even praised above their
merits more radiant in beauty from your kind commendations, while those
whose charms admit of no exaggeration are no less radiant with the
happiness of finding themselves so justly appreciated by you; thus each
countenance, thanks to the gentle arts you practise, is made to exhibit
the most smiling delight, for perfect content will set off even homely
features. And thus I account for why it is that woman, all lovely as she
is, never looks so much so as when seen beneath your roof. Come, M.
l'Ambassadeur, own that I have made out a good case, and that you
entirely concur with me in opinion."

"Your royal highness has afforded me too many previous reasons to admire
and adopt your opinions for me to hesitate in the present instance."

"And for me, my lord," said the countess, "at the risk of being included
among those fair ladies who get a little more praise or flattery (which
was it your highness styled it?) than they deserve, I accept your very
flattering explanation with as much qualified pleasure as if it were
really founded on truth."

"In order more effectually to convince you, madame, that nothing is more
correct than all I have asserted, let us make a few observations
touching the fine effect of praise in animating and lighting up the
countenance."

"Ah, my lord, you are laying a very mischievous snare for me," said the
countess, smiling.

"Well, then, I will abandon that idea; but upon one condition, that you
honour me by taking my arm. I have been told wonderful things of a
'Winter Garden,'--a work from Fairyland. May I put up my humble petition
to be allowed to see this new wonder of a 'hundred and one nights?'"

"Oh, my lord, with the utmost pleasure. But I see that your highness had
received a most exaggerated account. Perhaps you will accompany me, and
judge for yourself. Only in this instance I would fain hope that your
habitual indulgence may induce you to feel as little disappointment as
possible at finding how imperfectly the reality equals your
expectations."

The ambassadress then took the offered arm of Rodolph, and proceeded
with him to the other salons, while the count remained conversing with
the Baron de Graün and Murphy, whom he had been acquainted with for some
time.

And a more beautiful scene of enchantment never charmed the eye than
that presented by the aspect of the winter garden, to which Rodolph had
conducted his noble hostess. Let the reader imagine an enclosure of
about forty feet in length, and thirty in width (leading out of a long
and splendid gallery), surmounted by a glazed and vaulted roof, the
building being securely covered in for about fifty feet. Round the
parallelogram it described, the walls were concealed by an infinite
number of mirrors, over which was placed a small and delicate trellis of
fine green rushes, which, thanks to the strong light reflected on the
highly polished glass, resembled an arbour, and were almost entirely
hidden by a thick row of orange-trees, as large as those of the
Tuileries, mixed with camellias of equal size; while the golden fruit
and verdant foliage of the one contrasted beautifully with the rich
clusters of waxen flowers, of all colours, with which the other was
loaded. The remainder of the garden was thus devised:

Five or six enormous clumps of trees, and Indian or other tropical
shrubs, planted in immense cases filled with peat earth, were surrounded
by alleys paved with a mosaic shell-work, and sufficiently wide for two
or three persons to walk abreast. It is impossible to describe the
wondrous effect produced by this rich display of tropical vegetation in
the midst of a European winter, and almost in the very centre of a
ballroom. Here might be seen gigantic bananas stretching their tall arms
to the glass roof which covered them, and blending the vivid green of
their palms with the lanceolated leaves of the large magnolias, some of
which already displayed their matchless and odoriferous flowers with
their bell-shaped calices, purple without and silvery white within, from
which started forth the little gold-threaded stamens. At a little
distance were grouped the palm and date-trees of the Levant; the red
macaw, and fig-trees from India; all blooming in full health and vigour,
and displaying their foliage in all its luxuriance, gave to the _tout
ensemble_ a mass of rich, brilliant tropical verdure, which, glittering
among the thousand lights, sparkled with the colours of the emerald.

Along the trellising, between the orange-trees, and amid the clumps,
were trained every variety of rare climbing plants; sometimes hanging
their long wreaths of leaves and flowers in graceful festoons, then
depending like blooming serpents from the tall boughs; now trailing at
their roots, then ambitiously scaling the very walls, till they hung
their united tresses round the transparent and vaulted roof, from which
again they floated in mingled masses, waving in the pure, light breeze
loaded with so many odours. The winged pomegranate, the passion-flower,
with its large purple flowers striated with azure, and crowned with its
dark violet tuft, waved in long spiral wreaths over the heads of the
admiring crowd, then, as though fatigued with the sport, threw their
colossal garlands of delicate flowers across the hard, prickly leaves of
the gigantic aloes.

The bignonia of India, with its long, cup-shaped flower of dark sulphur
colour, and slight, slender leaves, was placed beside the delicate
flesh-coloured petals of the stephanotis, so justly appreciated for its
exquisite perfume; the two stems mutually clinging to each other for
support, and mingling their leaves and flowers in one confused mass,
disposed them in elegant festoons of green fringe spangled with gold and
silver spots, around the immense velvet foliage of the Indian fig.
Farther on, started forth, and then fell again in a sort of variegated
and floral cascade, immense quantities of the stalks of the asclepias,
whose leaves, large, umbellated, and in clusters of from fifteen to
twenty star-shaped flowers, grew so thickly, so evenly, that they might
have been mistaken for bouquets of pink enamel surrounded with leaves of
fine green porcelain. The borders of the cases containing the orange
sand camellias were filled with the choicest cape heaths, the tulips of
Thol, the narcissus of Constantinople, the hyacinth, irides, and
cyclamina of Persia; forming a sort of natural carpet, presenting one
harmonious blending of the loveliest tints.

Chinese lanterns of transparent silk, some pale blue, others pink,
partly concealed amid the foliage, threw a soft and gentle light over
this enchanting scene; nor could a more ingenious idea have been
resorted to than in the happy amalgamation of these two colours, by
which a charming and almost unearthly light was produced combining the
clear cerulean blue of a summer's night with the rose-coloured
coruscations emitted from sparkling rays of an aurora borealis.

The entrance to this immense hothouse was from a long gallery glittering
with gold, with mirrors, crystal vases filled with the choicest
perfumes, and brilliantly lighted, and also raised a few steps above the
fairy palace we have been endeavouring to describe. The dazzling
brightness of the approach served as a sort of penumbra, in which were
indistinctly traced out the gigantic exotics discernible through a
species of arch, partly concealed by two crimson velvet curtains looped
back with golden cords so as to give a dim and misty view of the
enchanted land that lay beyond. An imaginative mind might easily have
persuaded himself he stood near a huge window opening on some beautiful
Asiatic landscape during the tranquillity of a summer's twilight.

The sounds of the orchestra, weakened by distance, and broken by the
joyous hum proceeding from the gallery, died languidly away among the
motionless foliage of the huge trees. Insensibly each fresh visitant to
this enchanting spot lowered his voice until his words fell in whispers;
for the light genuine air, embalmed with a thousand rich odours,
appeared to cast a sort of somnolency over the senses; every breath
seemed to speak of the clustering plants whose balmy sweetness filled
the atmosphere. Certainly two lovers, seated in some corner of this
Eden, could conceive no greater happiness to be enjoyed on earth, than
thus dreamily to rest beneath the trees and flowers of this terrestrial
paradise.

At the end of this winter garden were placed immense divans beneath
canopies of leaves and flowers; the subdued light of the hothouse
forming a powerful contrast with the gallery, the distance seemed filled
with a species of gold-coloured, shining fog, in the midst of which
glittered and flickered, like a living embroidery, the dazzling and
varied robes of the ladies, combined with the prismatic scintillations
of the congregated mass of diamonds and precious stones. Rodolph's first
sensation upon arriving at this enchanting triumph of art over nature
was that of most unfeigned surprise.

"This is, indeed, a wonderfully beautiful carrying out of a poetical
idea," said he, almost involuntarily; then, turning to the ambassadress,
he exclaimed, "Madame, till now, I had not deemed such wonders
practicable. We have not in the scene before us a mere union of
unbounded expense with the most exquisite taste, but you give us poetry
in action. Instead of writing as a master poet, or painting as a
first-rate artist, you create that which they would scarcely venture to
dream of."

"Your royal highness is too indulgent."

"Nay, but candidly, all must agree that the mind which could so
faithfully depict this ravishing scene, with its charm of colours and
contrasts,--beyond us, the loud notes of joy and mirthful revelry, here
the soft silence and sweet, gentle murmurs of distant voices, that lull
the spirit into a fancied flight beyond this fitful existence,--surely,
surely, without suspicion of flattery, it may be said of the planner and
contriver of all this, such a one was born a poet and a painter
combined."

"The praises of your royal highness are so much the more dangerous from
the skill and cleverness with which they are uttered, and which makes us
listen to them with delight, even in defiance of our sternest
resolutions. But allow me to call your royal highness's attention to the
very lovely person who is approaching us. I must have you admit that the
Marquise d'Harville must shine preeminently beautiful any and every
where. Is she not graceful? And does not the gentle elegance of her
whole appearance acquire a fresh charm, from the contrast with the
severe yet classic beauty by whom she is accompanied?"

The individuals thus alluded to were the Countess Sarah Macgregor and
the Marquise d'Harville, who were at this moment descending the steps
which led from the gallery to the winter garden. Neither was the
panegyric bestowed by the ambassadress on Madame d'Harville at all
exaggerated. No words can accurately describe the loveliness of her
person, and the Marquise d'Harville was then in the first bloom of
youthful charms; but her beauty, delicate and fragile as it was,
appeared less to belong to the strict regularity of her features than to
the irresistible expression of sweetness and universal kindness, which
imparted a charm to her countenance impossible to resist or to describe;
and this peculiar charm served invariably to distinguish Madame
d'Harville from all other fashionable beauties; for goodness of heart
and kindliness of disposition are but rarely seen as the prevailing
passions revealed in a face as fair, as young, high-born, and ardently
worshipped by all, as was the Marquise d'Harville, who shone forth in
all her lustre as the brightest star in the galaxy of fashion. Too wise,
virtuous, and right-minded to listen to the host of flatterers by whom
she was surrounded, Madame d'Harville smiled as gratefully on all as
though she could have given them credit for speaking the truth, had not
her own modest opinion of her just claims to such homage have forbidden
her accepting of praise she never could have deserved. Wholly
indifferent to flattery, yet sensibly alive to kindness, she perfectly
distinguished between sympathy and insincerity. Her acute penetration,
correct judgment, and lively wit, unmixed by the slightest ill-nature,
made her wage an early, though good-tempered war with those vain and
egotistical beings who crowd and oppress society with the view of
monopolising general attention, and, blinded by their own self-love,
expect one universal deference and submission.

"Those kind of persons," said Madame d'Harville one day, laughingly,
"appear to me as if their whole lives were passed in dancing '_Le
Cavalier Seul_' before an invisible mirror."

An unassuming and unpretending person, however reserved and consequently
unpopular he might be with others, was sure to find a steady friend and
partial observer in Madame d'Harville.

This trifling digression is absolutely essential to the right
understanding of facts of which we shall speak hereafter.

The complexion of Madame d'Harville was of the purest white, tinged with
the most delicate carnation; her long tresses of bright chestnut hair
floated over her beautifully formed shoulders, white and polished as
marble. It would be an impossible task to describe her large dark gray
eyes, fringed with their thick lashes, and beaming with angelic
sweetness; her coral lips, with their gentle smile, gave to her eyes the
indefinable charm that her affable and winning mode of expressing
herself derived from their mild and angelic expression of approving
goodness. We will not farther delay the reader by describing the
perfection of her figure, nor dwell upon the distinguished air which
marked her whole appearance. She wore a white crape dress, trimmed with
the natural flowers of the camellia, intermixed with its own rich green
leaves. Here and there a diamond sparkled among the waxy petals, as if a
dewdrop fresh from its native skies had fallen there. A garland of the
same flowers, equally ornamented with precious stones, was placed with
infinite grace upon her fair and open brow.

The peculiar style of the Countess Sarah Macgregor's beauty served to
set off the fair feminine loveliness of her companion. Though turned
thirty-five years of age, Sarah looked much younger. Nothing appears to
preserve the body more effectually from all the attacks of sickness or
decay than a cold-hearted, egotistical disregard of every one but
ourselves; it encrusts the body with a cold, icy covering, which alike
resists the inroads of bodily or mental wear and tear. To this cause may
be ascribed the wonderful preservation of Countess Sarah's appearance.

The lady whose name we last mentioned wore a dress of pale amber watered
silk, beneath a crape tunic of the same colour. A simple wreath of the
dark leaves of the _Pyrus Japonicus_ encircled her head, and harmonised
admirably with the bandeaux of raven hair it confined. This classically
severe mode of head-dress gave to the profile of this imperious woman
the character and resemblance of an antique statue. Many persons,
mistaking their real cast of countenance, imagine some peculiar vocation
delineated in their traits. Thus one man, who fancies he possesses a
warlike air, assumes the warrior; another imagines

      "His eye, in a fine frenzy rolling,"

marks him out as a poet; instantly he turns down his shirt-collar,
adopts poetical language, and writes himself poet. So the self-imagined
conspirator wastes days and hours in pondering over mighty deeds he
feels called upon to do. The politician, upon the same terms, bores the
world and his friends with his perpetual outpourings upon political
economy; and the man whose saintly turn of countenance persuades its
owner into the belief of a corresponding character within, forthwith
abjures the pomps and vanities of the world, and aims at reforming his
brethren by his pulpit eloquence. Now, ambition being Sarah's ruling
passion, and her noble and aristocratical features well assisting the
delusion, she smiled as the word "diadem" crossed her thoughts, and lent
a willing ear to the predictions of her Highland nurse, and firmly
believed herself predestined to a sovereign destiny. Spite of the
trifling embonpoint that gave to her figure (which, though fatter than
Madame d'Harville's, was not less slender and nymph-like) a voluptuous
gracefulness, Sarah boasted of all the freshness of early youth, and few
could long sustain the fire of her black and piercing eyes; her nose was
aquiline; her finely formed mouth and rich ruby lips were expressive of
the highest determination, haughtiness, and pride.

The marquise and Sarah had recognised Rodolph in the winter garden at
the moment they were descending into it from the gallery; but the prince
feigned not to observe their presence.

"The prince is so absorbed with the ambassadress," said Madame
d'Harville to Sarah, "that he pays not the slightest attention to us."

"You are quite mistaken, my dear Clémence," rejoined the countess; "the
prince saw us as quickly and as plainly as we saw him, but I frightened
him away; you see he still bears malice with me."

"I am more than ever at a loss to understand the singular obstinacy with
which he persists in shunning you,--you, formerly an old friend.
'Countess Sarah and myself are sworn enemies,' replied he to me once in
a joking manner; 'I have made a vow never to speak to her; and you may
judge how sacred must be the vow that hinders me from conversing with so
charming a lady.' And, strange and unaccountable as was this reply, I
had no alternative but to submit to it."

"And yet I can assure you that the cause of this deadly feud, half in
jest, and half in earnest as it is, originates in the most simple
circumstance. Were it not that a third party is implicated in it, I
should have explained the whole to you long ago. But what is the matter,
my dear child? You seem as though your thoughts were far from the
present scene."

"Nothing, nothing, I assure you," replied the marquise, faintly; "but
the gallery is so very hot, it gave me a violent headache. Let us sit
down here for a minute or two. I hope and believe it will soon be
better."

"You are right; see, here is a nice quiet corner, where you will be in
perfect safety from the researches of those who are lamenting your
absence," added Sarah, pronouncing the last words with marked emphasis.

The two ladies then seated themselves on a divan, almost concealed
beneath the clustering shrubs and overhanging plants.

"I said those who would be lamenting your absence, my dear
Clémence,--come, own that I deserve praise for so discreetly forming my
speech."

The marquise blushed slightly, cast down her eyes, but spoke not.

"How unreasonable you are!" exclaimed Sarah, in a tone of friendly
reproach. "Can you not trust me, my dear child?--yes, child; for am I
not old enough to be your mother?"

"Not trust you?" uttered the marquise, sadly; "alas! have I not on the
contrary confessed that to you which I should hardly have dared to own
to myself?"

"Well, then, come, rouse yourself; now, let us have a little talk about
him: and so you have really sworn to drive him to despair?"

"For the love of heaven," exclaimed Madame d'Harville, "think what you
are saying!"

"I tell you I know him better than you do, my poor child; he is a man of
cool and decided energy, who sets but little value on his life; he has
had misfortunes enough to make him quite weary of it; and it really
seems as if you daily found greater pleasure in tormenting him, and
playing with his feelings."

"Is it possible you can really think so?"

"Indeed, in spite of myself, I cannot refrain from entertaining that
opinion. Oh, if you but knew how over-susceptible some minds are
rendered by a continuance of sorrows and afflictions,--just now I saw
two large tears fall from his eyes, as he gazed on you."

"Are you quite sure of what you say?"

"Indeed, I am quite certain; and that, too, in a ballroom, at the risk
of becoming an object of general derision, if this uncontrollable misery
were perceived! Ah! let me tell you, a person must truly love to bear
all this, and even to be careless about concealing his sufferings from
the world."

"For the love of heaven, do not speak thus!" replied Madame d'Harville,
in a voice trembling with emotion. "Alas! you have touched me nearly; I
know too well what it is to struggle with a hidden grief, yet wear an
outward expression of calmness and resignation. Alas! alas! 'tis the
deep pity and commiseration I feel for him has been my ruin," added she,
almost unconsciously.

"Nonsense! What an over-nice person you are, to talk of a little
innocent flirtation being ruinous, and that, too, with a man so
scrupulously guarded as to abstain from ever appearing in your husband's
presence, for fear of compromising you. You must admit that M. Charles
Robert is a man of surprising honour, delicacy, and real feeling. I feel
the more inclined to espouse his cause from the recollection that you
have never met him elsewhere but at my house, and because I can answer
for his principles, and that his devoted attachment to you can only be
equalled by the deep respect he bears you."

"I have never doubted the many noble qualities you have so repeatedly
assured me he possesses, but you know well that it is his long
succession of bitter afflictions which have so warmly interested me in
his favour."

"And well does he merit this interest, and most fully do his excellent
qualities absolve you of all blame in thus bestowing it. Surely so fine
and noble a countenance bespeaks a mind equally superior to all mankind.
How completely are you reminded, while gazing on his tall and finely
proportioned figure, of the _preux chevaliers_ of bygone days,'_sans
peur et sans reproche_.' I once saw him dressed in his uniform as
commandant of the national guard, and, handsome as he is, I really
think he looked surpassingly well, and I could but say to myself, that,
if nobility were the award of inward merit and external beauty, M.
Charles Robert, instead of being so called, would take precedence of
nearly all our dukes and peers. Would he not be a fitting representative
of any of the most distinguished families in France?"

"You know, my dear countess, how very little importance I attach to mere
birth, and you yourself have frequently reproached me with being
strongly inclined to republicanism," said Madame d'Harville, smiling
gently.

"For my own part, I always thought, with you, that M. Charles Robert
required not the aid of rank or titles to render him worthy of universal
admiration. Then, what extreme talent he possesses! What a fine voice he
has! And what delightful morning concerts we three have been able to
achieve, owing to his all-powerful assistance! Ah, my dear Clémence, do
you remember the first time you ever sang with him: what passionate
expression did he not throw into the words of that beautiful duet, so
descriptive of his love, and his fear of offending her who was the
object of it, by revealing it?"

"Let me entreat of you," said Madame d'Harville, after a long silence,
"to speak of something else; indeed I dare not listen further: what you
but just now intimated of his depressed and unhappy appearance has
caused me much pain."

"Nay, my dear friend, I meant not to grieve you, but merely to point out
the probability that a man, rendered doubly sensitive by the succession
of past misfortunes, might feel his courage insufficient to encounter
the fresh trial of your rejection of his suit, and thus be induced to
end his hopeless love and his life together."

"Oh, no more! no more!" almost shrieked Madame d'Harville, interrupting
Sarah; "this fearful idea has glanced across my mind already." Then,
after a second silence of some minutes, the marquise resumed, "Let us,
as I said before, talk of somebody else,--of your mortal enemy, for
instance," added she, with assumed gaiety of manner; "come, we will take
the prince for a fresh theme of conversation; I had not seen him,
previously to this evening, for a very long time. Do you know that I
think he looks handsomer than ever? Though all but king, he has lost
none of the winning sweetness and affability of his manner, and, spite
of my republicanism, I must confess I have seldom, if ever, known so
irresistible a person."

Sarah threw a side glance of deep and scrutinising hatred upon her
unconscious rival, but, quickly recovering herself, she said, gaily:

"Now, my dear Clémence, you must confess to being a most capricious
little lady; you have regular alternating paroxysms of admiration and
violent dislike for the prince; why, a few months ago, I mean about his
first arrival here, you were so captivated by him, that, between
ourselves, I was half afraid you had lost your heart past all hope of
recall."

"Thanks to you," replied Madame d'Harville, smiling, "my admiration was
very short-lived; for so well did you act up to your character of the
prince's sworn foe, and such fearful tales did you tell me of his
profligacy and misconduct, that you succeeded in inspiring me with an
aversion as powerful as had been the infatuation which led you to fear
for the safety of my heart; which, by the way, I cannot think would ever
have been placed in any danger from the attempts of your enemy to
disturb its repose, since, shortly before you gave me those frightful
particulars of the prince's character, he had quite ceased to honour me
with his visits, although on the most intimate and friendly terms with
my husband."

"Talking of your husband, pray is he here to-night?" inquired Sarah.

"No," replied Madame d'Harville, in a tone of embarrassment; "he
preferred remaining at home."

"He seems to me to mix less and less in the world."

"He never liked what is called fashionable gaiety."

The marquise's agitation visibly increased; and Sarah, whose quick eye
easily perceived it, continued:

"The last time I saw him he looked even paler than usual."

"He has been very much out of health lately."

"My dearest Clémence, will you permit me to speak to you without
reserve?"

"Oh, yes, pray do!"

"How comes it that the least allusion to your husband always throws you
into such a state of extraordinary alarm and uneasiness?"

"What an idea! Is it possible you can mean it seriously?" asked poor
Madame d'Harville, trying to smile.

"Indeed, I am quite in earnest," rejoined her companion; "whenever you
are speaking of him, your countenance assumes, even in spite of
yourself,--but how shall I make myself understood?" and Sarah, with the
tone and fixed gaze of one who wished to read the most secret thoughts
of the person she addressed, slowly and emphatically added, "a look of
mingled aversion and fear!"

The fixed pallid features of Madame d'Harville at first defied even
Sarah's practised eye, but her keen gaze soon detected a slight
convulsive working of the mouth, with a tremulous movement of the under
lip of her victim; but feeling it unsafe to pursue the subject farther
at this moment so as to awaken the marquise's mistrust of her friendly
intentions, by way, therefore, of concealing her real suspicions, she
continued:

"Yes, just that sort of dislike any woman would entertain for a peevish,
jealous, ill-tempered--"

At this explanation of the countess's meaning, as regarded Madame
d'Harville's imagined dislike for her husband, a heavy load seemed
taken from her; the working of her lip ceased, and she replied:

"Let me assure you M. d'Harville is neither peevish nor jealous." Then,
as if searching for some means of breaking a conversation so painful to
her feelings, she suddenly exclaimed, "Ah! here comes that tiresome
friend of my husband's, the Duke de Lucenay. I hope he has not seen us.
Where can he have sprung from? I thought he was a thousand miles off!"

"It was reported that he had gone somewhere in the East for a year or
two, and behold, at the end of five months, here he is back again! His
unexpected arrival must have sadly annoyed the Duchess de Lucenay,
though poor De Lucenay is a very inoffensive creature," said Sarah, with
an ill-natured smile. "Nor will Madame de Lucenay be the only one to
feel vexation at his thus changing his mind; her friend, M. de St. Remy,
will duly and affectionately sympathise in all her regrets on the
subject."

"Come, come, my dear Sarah, I cannot allow you to scandalise; say that
this return of M. de Lucenay is a nuisance to everybody; the duke is
sufficiently disagreeable for you to generalise the regret his
unexpected presence occasions."

"I do not slander, I merely repeat. It is also said that M. de St. Remy,
the model of our young _élégantes_, whose splendid doings have filled
all Paris, is all but ruined! 'Tis true, he has by no means reduced
either his establishment or his expenditure; however, there are several
ways of accounting for that; in the first place, Madame de Lucenay is
immensely rich."

"What a horrible idea!"

"Still I only repeat what others say. There, the duke sees us; he is
coming towards us; we must resign ourselves to our fate,--miserable, is
it not? I know nothing so hard to bear as that man's company; he makes
himself so very disagreeable, and then laughs so disgustingly loud at
the silly things he says. Indeed, he is so boisterous that the bare idea
of him makes one think of pretending to faint, or any other pretext, to
avoid him. Talking of fainting, pray let me beg of you, if you have the
least regard for your fan or essence-bottle, to beware how you allow him
to handle either, for he has the unfortunate habit of breaking whatever
he touches, and all with the most facetious self-satisfied air
imaginable."


END OF VOLUME I.


       *       *       *       *       *
Transcriber's Notes:


This e-text was prepared from numbered edition 505 of the 1000 printed.

Minor punctuation and capitalization corrections have been made without
comment.

Minor typographical errors of single words, otherwise spelled correctly
throughout the text have been made without comment.

Word Variations appearing in the original text which have been retained:

"bull-dog" (1) and "bulldog" (2)
"protégé" (1), "protégée" (8) and "protégés" (1)
"rencontre" (2) and "rencounter" (1)
"Sarah Seyton of Halsburg" (1) and "Sarah Seyton of Halsbury" (1)

Words using the [oe] ligature, which have been herein represented as
"oe": "manoeuvre", "coeur", "chef-d'oeuvre", "coup-d'oeil".

Throughout the text, illustrations and their captions were placed on
facing pages. For the purpose of this e-text these pages have been
combined into one entry.

Footnotes, originally at the bottom of a printed page, have been placed
directly below the paragraph in which their anchor symbol appears.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Mysteries of Paris, Volume 1 of 6, by 
Eugène Sue

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MYSTERIES OF PARIS, V.1 ***

***** This file should be named 33800-8.txt or 33800-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/3/8/0/33800/

Produced by David Edwards, Christine Aldridge and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
(Stanford University, SUL Books in the Public Domain)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

Project Gutenberg's The Mysteries of Paris, Volume 2 of 6, by Eugène Sue

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Mysteries of Paris, Volume 2 of 6

Author: Eugène Sue

Illustrators: G. Mercier
              Bicknell
              Léon Poiteau
              Adrian Marcel

Release Date: September 22, 2010 [EBook #33801]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MYSTERIES OF PARIS, V.2 ***




Produced by David Edwards, Christine Aldridge and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
(Stanford University, SUL Books in the Public Domain)





Transcriber's Notes:

1. Passages in italics are surrounded by _underscores_.

2. Passages in Gothic Bold are surrounded by +plus+ signs.

3. Other transcription notes appear at the end of this e-text.




[Illustration: "_He Took from the Bed a Large Plaid Shawl_"
Etching by Adrian Marcel, after the drawing by Frank T. Merrill]




+The Mysteries of Paris.+

  _ILLUSTRATED WITH ETCHINGS
  BY MERCIER, BICKNELL, POITEAU,
  AND ADRIAN MARCEL._

                 _BY EUGENE SUE_


      _IN SIX VOLUMES
          VOLUME II._


        _PRINTED FOR
   FRANCIS A. NICCOLLS & CO.
           BOSTON_


      _EDITION DE LUXE._

_Limited to One Thousand Copies._

          No.______




CONTENTS.


   CHAPTER                                                     PAGE
         I. THE BALL                                             11
        II. THE RENDEZVOUS                                       36
       III. AN IDYL                                              61
        IV. THE AMBUSCADE                                        74
         V. THE RECTORY-HOUSE                                    88
        VI. THE RENCOUNTER                                       99
       VII. AN EVENING AT THE FARM                              105
      VIII. THE DREAM                                           150
        IX. THE LETTER                                          159
         X. THE HOLLOW WAY                                      195
        XI. CLÉMENCE D'HARVILLE                                 201
       XII. MISERY                                              256
      XIII. JUDGMENT AND EXECUTION                              286
       XIV. RIGOLETTE                                           310




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.

                                                               PAGE
      "HE TOOK FROM THE BED A LARGE PLAID SHAWL"      _Frontispiece_
      "AT LENGTH ALIGHTED ON HER SHOULDER"                       66
      "'SO I HAVE BROUGHT TURK WITH ME'"                         97
      "'YOU MUST GIVE ME LEAVE'"                                208




THE MYSTERIES OF PARIS.




CHAPTER I.

THE BALL.


Belonging to one of the first families in France, still young, and with
a face that would have been agreeable had it not been for the almost
ridiculous and disproportionate length of his nose, M. de Lucenay joined
to a restless love of constant motion the habit of talking and laughing
fearfully loud upon subjects quite at variance with good taste or
polished manners, and throwing himself into attitudes so abrupt and
awkward that it was only by recalling who he was, that his being found
in the midst of the most distinguished societies in Paris could be
accounted for, or a reason assigned for tolerating his gestures and
language; for both of which he had now, by dint of long practice and
adherence, acquired a sort of free license or impunity. He was shunned
like the plague, although not deficient in a certain description of wit,
which told here and there amid the indescribable confusion of remarkable
phraseology which he allowed himself the use of; in fact, he was one of
those unintentional instruments of vengeance one would always like to
employ in the wholesale chastisement of persons who have rendered
themselves either ridiculous or abhorrent.

The Duchess de Lucenay, one of the most agreeable, and, at the same
time, most fashionable women in Paris (spite of her having numbered
thirty summers), had more than once furnished matter of conversation
among the scandal-dealers of Paris; but her errors, whatever they were
supposed to be, were pardoned, in consideration of the heavy drawback of
such a partner as M. de Lucenay.

Another feature in the character of this latter-named individual was a
singular affectation of the most absurd and unknown expressions,
relative to imaginary complaints and ridiculous infirmities he amused
himself in supposing you suffered from, and concerning which he would
make earnest inquiries, in a loud voice, and in the immediate presence
of a hundred persons. But possessed of first-rate courage, and always
ready to take the consequences of his disagreeable jokes, M. de Lucenay
had been concerned in various affairs of honour arising out of them,
with varied success; coming off sometimes victor, sometimes vanquished,
without being in any way cured of his unpleasant and annoying tricks.

All this premised, we will ask the reader to imagine the loud, harsh
voice of the personage we have been describing, shouting from the
distance at which he first recognised Madame d'Harville and Sarah:

"Holla! holla! who is that out there? Come, who is it? Let's see. What!
the prettiest woman at the ball sitting out here, away from everybody! I
can't have this; it is high time I returned from the other end of the
world to put a stop to such doings as this. I tell you what, marquise,
if you persist in thus concealing yourself from general view, and
cheating people from looking at you, I will set up a cry of fire! fire!
that shall bring every one out of the ballroom, around you."

And then, by way of terminating his discourse, M. de Lucenay threw
himself almost on his back beside the two ladies, crossed his left leg
over his right thigh, and held his foot in his hand.

"You have soon returned from Constantinople, my lord," observed Madame
d'Harville, fancying it was necessary to say something, and, at the same
time, drawing away from her unpleasant neighbour with ill-concealed
impatience.

"Ah, that is just what my wife said! 'Already back, my lord?' exclaimed
she, when she saw me alight from my travelling-carriage; 'Why, bless me,
I did not expect you so soon!' And, do you know, instead of flying to my
arms, as if the surprise had delighted her, she turned quite sulky, and
refused to appear with me at this, my first ball since my return! And,
upon my soul, I declare her staying away has caused a far greater
sensation than my presence,--droll, isn't it? 'Pon my life, I declare I
can't make it out. When she is with me, nobody pays the least attention
to me; but when I entered the room alone to-night, such a crowd came
humming and buzzing around me, all calling out at once, 'Where is Madame
de Lucenay? Is not she coming this evening? Oh, dear, what a
disappointment! How vexatious! How disagreeable!' etc., etc. And then,
marquise, when I come where you are, and expect, after returning all the
way from Constantinople, you will be overjoyed to see me, you look upon
me as if I were a dog running amidst an interesting game of ninepins;
and yet, for all I see, I am just as agreeable as other people."

"And it would have been so easy for you to have continued agreeable--in
the East," added Madame d'Harville, slightly smiling.

"Stop abroad, you mean, I suppose; yes, I dare say. I tell you I could
not, and I would not; and it is not quite what I like, to hear you say
so!" exclaimed M. de Lucenay, uncrossing his legs, and beating the crown
of his hat after the fashion of a tambourine.

"Well, for heaven's sake, my lord, be still, and do not call out so very
loudly," said Madame d'Harville, angrily, "or really you will compel me
to change my place."

"Change your place! Ah, to be sure! You want to take my arm, and walk
about the gallery a little; come along then, I'm ready."

"Walk with you! Certainly not! And pray let me beg of you not to meddle
with that bouquet--and have the goodness not to touch the fan either;
you will only break it, as you always do."

"Oh, bless you! talking of breaking fans, I am unlucky. Did my wife ever
show you a magnificent Chinese fan, given to her by Madame de Vaudémont?
Well, I broke that!" And, having delivered himself of these comforting
words, M. de Lucenay again threw himself back on the divan he had been
lounging on, but, with his accustomed gaucherie, contrived to pitch
himself over the back of it, on to the ground, grasping in his hand a
quantity of the floating wreaths of climbing plants which depended from
the boughs of the trees under which the party was sitting, and which he
had been, for some time, amusing himself with essaying to catch, as,
moved by the light breeze admitted into the place, they undulated
gracefully over his head. The suddenness of his fall brought down, not
only those he held, but the parent stems belonging to them; and poor De
Lucenay was so covered by the mass of foliage thus unexpectedly
obtained, that, ere he could thoroughly disengage himself from their
circling tendrils, he presented the appearance of some monarch of
May-day crowned with his leafy diadem. So whimsical an appearance as he
presented drew down roars of deafening, stunning laughter; much to the
annoyance of Madame d'Harville, who would quickly have got out of the
vicinity of so awkward and unpleasant a person had she not perceived M.
Charles Robert (the commandant of Madame Pipelet's accounts) advancing
from the other end of the gallery; and, unwilling to appear as though
going to meet him, she once more resumed her seat beside M. de Lucenay.

"I say, Lady Macgregor," vociferated the incorrigible De Lucenay,
"didn't I look preciously like a wild man of the woods, or the god Pan,
or a sylvan, or a naiad, or some of those savage creatures, with that
green wreath round my head? Oh, but talking of savages," added he,
abruptly approaching Sarah, "Lady Macgregor, I must tell you a most
outrageously indecent story. Just imagine that at Otaheite--"

"My lord duke--" interrupted Sarah, in a tone of freezing rebuke.

"Just as you like,--you are not obliged to hear my story if you don't
like it; you are the loser, that's all. Ah! I see Madame de Fonbonne out
there; I shall keep it for her; she is a dear, kind creature, and will
be delighted to hear it; so I'll save it for her."

Madame de Fonbonne was a fat little woman, of about fifty years of age,
very pretending, and very ridiculous. Her fat double chin rested on her
equally fat throat; and she was continually talking, with upturned eyes,
of her tender, her sensitive soul; the languor of her soul; the craving
of her soul; the aspirations of her soul. To these disadvantages, she
added the additional one of being particularly ill-dressed, upon the
present occasion, in a horrible-looking copper-coloured turban, with a
sprinkling of green flowers over it.

"Yes," again asserted De Lucenay, in his loudest voice, "that charming
anecdote shall be told to Madame de Fonbonne."

"May I be permitted, my lord duke, to inquire the subject of your
conversation?" said the lady thus apostrophised, who, hearing her name
mentioned, immediately commenced her usual mincing, bridling attempts to
draw up her chubby self, but, failing in the effort, fell back upon the
easier manoeuvre of "rolling up the whites of her eyes," as it is
commonly called.

"It refers, madame, to a most horribly indecent, revolting, and strange
story."

"Heaven bless me! and who dares--oh, dear me, who would venture--"

"I would, madame. I can answer for the truth of the anecdote, and that
it would make a stick or a stone blush to hear it; but, as I am aware
how dearly you love such stories, I will relate it to you. You must
know, then, that in Otaheite--"

"My lord," exclaimed the indignant lady, turning up her eyes with
indignant horror, "it really is surprising you can allow yourself to--"

"Now for those unkind looks you shall not hear my pretty story either,
though I had been reserving it for you. And, now I look at you, I can
but wonder that you, so celebrated for the taste and good style of your
dress, should have put that wretched thing on your head for a turban,
but which looks more like an old copper baking-dish spotted all over
with verdigris." So saying, the duke, as if charmed with his own wit,
burst into a loud and long peal of laughter.

"If, my lord," exclaimed the enraged lady, "you merely returned from the
East to resume your offensive jokes, which are tolerated because you are
supposed to be only half in your senses, all who know you are bound to
hope you intend to return as quickly as you came;" saying which she
arose, and majestically waddled away.

"I tell you what, Lady Macgregor, if I don't take devilish good care, I
shall let fly at that stupid old prude and pull her old stew-pan off her
head," said M. de Lucenay, thrusting his hands deep down into his
pockets as if to prevent their committing the retaliating mischief he
contemplated. "But no," said he, after a pause, "I won't hurt the
'sensitive soul,' poor innocent thing! Ha! ha! ha! Besides, think of her
being an orphan at her tender age!" And renewed peals of laughter
announced that the imagination of the duke had again found a fresh fund
of amusement in some reminiscence of Madame de Fonbonne; which, however,
soon gave place to an expression of surprise, as the figure of the
commandant, sauntering towards them, caught his eye.

"Holla!" cried he, "there's M. Charles Robert. I met him last summer at
the German baths; he is a deuced fine fellow,--sings like a swan. Now,
marquise, I'll show you some fun,--just see how I'll bother him. Would
you like me to introduce him to you?"

"Be quiet, if you can," said Sarah, turning her back most
unceremoniously upon M. de Lucenay, "and let us alone, I beg."

As M. Charles Robert, while affecting to be solely occupied in admiring
the rare plants on either side of him, continued to advance, M. de
Lucenay had cleverly contrived to get possession of Sarah's _flacon
d'esprit_, and was deeply and silently engaged in the interesting
employment of demolishing the stopper of the trinket.

Still M. Charles Robert kept on his gradual approach to the party he
was, in reality, making the object of his visit. His figure was tall and
finely proportioned; his features boasted the most faultless regularity;
his dress was in the first style of modern elegance; yet his
countenance, his whole person, were destitute of grace, or that
_distingué_ air which is more to be coveted than mere beauty, whether of
face or figure; his movements were stiff and constrained, and his hands
and feet large and coarse. As he approached Madame d'Harville his
insipid and insignificant countenance assumed, all at once, an
expression of the deepest melancholy, too sudden to be genuine;
nevertheless he acted the part as closely to nature as might be. M.
Robert had the air of a man so thoroughly wretched, so oppressed by a
multitude of sorrows, that as he came up to Madame d'Harville she could
not help recalling to mind the fearful mention made by Sarah touching
the violence to which grief such as his might drive him.

"How are you? How are you, my dear sir?" exclaimed the Duke de Lucenay,
interrupting the further approach of the commandant. "I have not had the
pleasure of seeing you since we met at the spas of ----. But what the
devil ails you,--are you ill?"

Hereupon M. Charles Robert assumed a languid and sentimental air, and,
casting a melancholy look towards Madame d'Harville, replied, in a tone
of deep depression:

"Indeed, my lord, I am very far from being well."

"God bless me! Why, what is the matter with you? Ah! I suppose that
confounded plaguy cough still sticks to you," said M. de Lucenay, with
an appearance of the most serious interest in the inquiry.

At this ridiculous question, M. Charles Robert stood for a moment as
though struck dumb with astonishment, but, quickly recovering himself,
said, while his face crimsoned, and his voice trembled with rage, in a
short, firm voice, to M. de Lucenay:

"Since you express so much uneasiness respecting my health, my lord, I
trust you will not fail calling to-morrow to know how I am."

"Upon my life and soul, my dear sir, I--but most certainly I will send,"
said the duke, with a haughty bow to M. Charles Robert, who, coolly
returning it, walked away.

"The best of the joke is," said M. de Lucenay, throwing himself again by
the side of Sarah, "that our tall friend there had no more of a spitting
complaint than the great Turk himself,--unless, indeed, I stumbled upon
the truth without knowing it. Well, he might have that complaint for
anything I know or care. What do you think, Lady Macgregor,--did that
great, tall fellow look, to you, as though he were suffering from _la
pituite_?"[1]

  [1] A sort of viscous, phlegmy complaint.

Sarah's only reply was an indignant rising from her seat, and hasty
removal from the vicinage of the annoying Duke de Lucenay.

All this had passed with the rapidity of thought. Sarah had experienced
considerable difficulty in restraining her inclination to indulge in a
hearty fit of laughter at the absurd question put by the Duke de Lucenay
to the commandant; but Madame d'Harville had painfully sympathised with
the feelings of a man so ridiculously interrogated in the presence of
the woman he loved. Then, horror-struck as the probable consequences of
the duke's jest rose to her mind, led away by her dread of the duel
which might arise out of it, and still further instigated by a feeling
of deep pity for one who seemed to her misled imagination as marked out
for every venomed shaft of envy, malice, and revenge, Clémence rose
abruptly from her seat, took the arm of Sarah, overtook M. Charles
Robert, who was boiling over with rage, and whispered to him, as she
passed:

"To-morrow, at one o'clock, I will be there."

Then, regaining the gallery with the countess, she immediately quitted
the ball.

Rodolph, in appearing at this fête, besides fulfilling a duty imposed on
him by his exalted rank and place in society, was further influenced by
the earnest desire to ascertain how far his suspicions, as regarded
Madame d'Harville, were well founded, and if she were, indeed, the
heroine of Madame Pipelet's account. After quitting the winter garden
with the Countess de ----, he had, in vain, traversed the various salons
in the hopes of meeting Madame d'Harville alone. He was returning to the
hothouse when, being momentarily delayed at the top of the stairs, he
was witness to the rapid scene between Madame d'Harville and M. Charles
Robert after the joke played off by the Duke de Lucenay. The significant
glances exchanged between Clémence and the commandant struck Rodolph
powerfully, and impressed him with the firm conviction that this tall
and prepossessing individual was the mysterious lodger of the Rue du
Temple. Wishing for still further confirmation of the idea, he returned
to the gallery. A waltz was about to commence, and in the course of a
few minutes he saw M. Charles Robert standing in the doorway, evidently
revelling in the satisfaction of his own ideas; enjoying, in the first
place, the recollection of his own retort to M. de Lucenay (for M.
Charles Robert, spite of his egregious folly and vanity, was by no means
destitute of bravery), and, secondly, revelling in the triumph of thus
obtaining a voluntary assignation with Madame d'Harville for the morrow;
and something assured him that this time she would be punctual. Rodolph
sought for Murphy.

"Do you see that fair young man," said he, "standing in the midst of
that group out there?"

"You mean the tall individual who seems so much amused with his own
thoughts, do you not? Yes, yes, I see him."

"Endeavour to get sufficiently near to him to be enabled to whisper, so
that he alone can catch the words, while you carefully avoid allowing
him to see the person who utters them, this sentence, 'You are late, my
angel!'"

The squire gazed at Rodolph with a perplexed air.

"My lord, do you seriously wish me to do this?"

"Seriously, my dear Murphy, I do; and should he hastily turn around when
you have spoken, assume that incomparable air of perfect nonchalance for
which you are so justly celebrated, so as to prevent his being able to
fix upon you as the person who has spoken."

"Depend upon my perfect obedience, my lord, although I am far from
having the slightest idea of your intention in assigning to me such a
task."

Before the conclusion of the waltz, the worthy Murphy had contrived to
place himself immediately behind M. Charles Robert, while Rodolph,
posted in a situation most advantageous for watching the effect of this
experiment, carefully observed Murphy's movements. In a minute, M.
Charles Robert turned suddenly around, as though struck with
astonishment and wonder. The immovable squire stirred not a feature; and
certainly Murphy's tall, portly figure, bald head, and grave, composed
countenance, appeared the least likely of any in the room to be those of
a man taking part in such a trick; and, indeed, it was evident, from the
continued gaze of the commandant in every other part of the space they
stood in, that M. Charles Robert was far from suspecting his
respectable, middle-aged neighbour of giving utterance to a phrase so
disagreeably recalling the _quid pro quo_ of which Madame Pipelet had
been alike the cause and the heroine. The waltz concluded, Murphy
rejoined Rodolph.

"Well, my lord," said he, "that smart young gentleman jumped as though
he had trodden on a hornet's nest. The words I uttered appeared to have
the effect of magic on him."

"They were so far magical, my dear Murphy, as they assisted me to
discover a circumstance I was most anxious to find out."

Conviction thus painfully obtained, Rodolph could only deplore the
dangerous position in which Madame d'Harville had placed herself, and
which seemed to him fraught with fresh evils, from a vague presentiment
of Sarah's being either a sharer or a confidant in the transaction, and
with this discovery came the fresh pain of believing that he had now
found out the source of M. d'Harville's secret sorrow; the man he so
highly esteemed, and for whom he felt a brother's regard, was pining in
silence over the misconduct of a wife he so tenderly loved, yet who, in
spite of her many charming qualities, could sacrifice her own and her
husband's happiness for the sake of an object so every way unworthy.
Master of so important a secret, yet incapable of betraying it, unable
to devise any plan to open the eyes of Madame d'Harville, who seemed
rather to yield to than resist her unlicensed passion for her lover,
Rodolph found himself obliged to remain a passive witness to the utter
ruin of a woman he had so passionately adored with as much silence as
devotion; nay, whom, spite of his best efforts, he still loved. He was
roused from these reflections by M. de Graün.

"If your royal highness," said the baron, bowing, "will deign to grant
me a brief interview in one of the lower rooms, which is now quite
devoid of company, I shall have the honour to lay before you the
particulars you desired me to collect."

Rodolph signed to M. de Graün to conduct him to the place named, when
the baron proceeded with his recital, as follows:

"The only duchess to whose name the initials 'N.' and 'L.' can possibly
belong is Madame de Lucenay, whose maiden name was Normant. Her grace is
not here this evening. I have just seen M. de Lucenay, her husband, who,
it seems, left Paris five months ago, with the expressed intention of
travelling in the East during the next year or two, but has unexpectedly
returned within the last day or two."

It may be recollected that, during Rodolph's visit to the Rue du Temple,
he picked up, on the landing-place adjoining the door of the charlatan
dentist's apartments, a cambric handkerchief, richly embroidered and
trimmed with costly lace, and bearing in the corner a ducal coronet with
the initials "N. L." It will also be borne in mind that this elegant
indication of high rank was wetted with the bitter tears of its noble
owner. In pursuance of his instructions, but in total ignorance of the
circumstances suggesting them, M. de Graün had inquired the name of
every duchess then in Paris, and gleaned the information now repeated to
Rodolph, and which the latter perfectly comprehended. He had no reason
for interesting himself in the fate of Madame de Lucenay; but he could
not reflect without a shudder that, if it were really she who visited
the pretended doctor (but who, he felt assured, was no other than the
infamous Polidori), this wretch, having possessed himself of her real
name and address through the agency of Tortillard, might make a fearful
use of a secret which placed the duchess so completely in his power.

"Chance is a strange thing, my lord, is it not?" resumed M. de Graün.

"It is; but how does it apply to the present case?"

"Why, at the very instant that M. de Grangeneuve was giving me these
facts concerning M. and Madame de Lucenay, and was adding, rather
ill-naturedly, that the unlooked-for return of the duke must have proved
particularly disagreeable, not only to the duchess but to the Viscount
de Saint-Remy, one of the most elegant and fashionable men in Paris, his
excellency the ambassador came up and inquired whether your royal
highness would permit him to present the viscount to you, as, having
just been appointed on the legation to Gerolstein, he would be happy to
avail himself of the present opportunity of paying his court to your
highness."

An expression of impatience escaped Rodolph, who exclaimed:

"Nothing could have been less agreeable to me. However, it is impossible
to refuse. Let the count know, therefore, that I am ready to receive M.
de Saint-Remy."

Rodolph knew too well how to support his princely dignity to allow his
feelings to interfere with the courtesy and affability required on the
present occasion; added to which, the world gave M. de Saint-Remy as a
favoured lover to the Duchess de Lucenay, and this circumstance greatly
excited the curiosity of Rodolph.

The Viscount de Saint-Remy, conducted by the Count de ----, now
approached. He was an exceedingly handsome young man, of about
twenty-five years of age, tall and slender, with the most _distingué_
air and prepossessing physiognomy; his olive complexion had that rich,
soft glow of amber cast over its transparent surface, so remarkable in
the paintings of Murillo; his glossy black hair, parted over his left
temple, was worn smooth over his forehead, and fell in light and easy
curls down the sides of his face, almost concealing the pale,
well-shaped ear. The deep, dark eyelash contrasted well with the clear
eye it shaded, the crystal of which was tinged with that blue cast which
bestows so much and such charming expression to the Indian eye. By a
singular caprice of nature, the thick, silky moustache which graced his
lip was the only ornament of a similar description visible on his
countenance, the chin and cheeks being smooth as those of a young
maiden. Perhaps it might be vanity which dictated the narrow black satin
cravat placed so low as to reveal the perfect contour of a throat which,
for whiteness and symmetrical roundness, might have furnished a model
for the artist's studio. The long ends of his cravat were confined by a
single pearl, inestimable for its size, the beauty of its shape, and the
splendour of its colour,--so vivid, that an opal could scarcely have
rivalled its continued prismatic changes. The perfect taste, and
exquisite style of M. de Saint-Remy harmonised well with the magnificent
simplicity of this jewel.

Once seen, the face and figure of M. de Saint-Remy was never forgotten,
so entirely did it differ from the usual style of _élégants_. He spared
no expense in procuring the most faultless turnout, and his carriages
and horses were everywhere cited as models of taste and correct
judgment. He played high, but skilfully; while the annual amount of his
betting-book was never less than from two to three thousand louis. The
costly elegance of his mansion, in the Rue de Chaillot, was everywhere
spoken of and admired. There he gave the most exquisite dinner-parties.
The highest play followed, and the hospitable host would lose large and
heavy sums with the most perfect indifference, though it was known that
his fortune had been dissipated long ago. All the viscount's property
had been derived from his mother; while his father lived in utter
seclusion in the wilds of Anjou, upon an income of the most slender
description.

By way of accounting for the unbounded expenditure of M. de Saint-Remy,
many among the envious or ill-natured referred, as Sarah had done, to
the large fortune of the Duchess de Lucenay; but they forgot that,
setting aside the infamy of the idea, M. de Lucenay would naturally
direct the disposal of his wife's property, and that M. de Saint-Remy's
annual expenses were at least two hundred thousand francs. Suspicions
were entertained of his being deeply indebted to imprudent
money-lenders; for Saint-Remy had no further inheritance to look forward
to. Others, again, spoke of his great successes on the turf, and hinted,
in an undertone, dark stories of training-grounds, and jockeys bribed by
him to make the horses against which he had betted largely lose; but by
far the greater number of the crowd by which Saint-Remy was surrounded
was content to eat his dinners, and occasionally to win his rouleaux,
without troubling themselves with conjectures as to how the one was
provided, and where the other came from.

By birth and education he was fully entitled to the rank he occupied in
the fashionable world; he was lively, witty, brave, a most amusing
companion, obliging and complaisant to the wishes of others; he gave
first-rate bachelor dinners, and afterwards took every bet that was
offered him. What more was required to secure his popularity? He was an
universal favourite with the fair sex, and could boast the most unvaried
success in all his love affairs; he was young, handsome, gallant, and
unsparingly munificent upon all occasions where opportunities occurred
of marking his devotion towards the high-bred females with whom he
associated in the _grande monde_; in a word, thanks to the general
infatuation he excited, the air of mystery thrown over the source of the
Pactolus from which he derived his golden supplies rather embellished
him with a certain mysterious charm, which seemed but to add to his
attractions. Sometimes it would be said, with a careless smile, "What a
fellow that Saint-Remy is: he must have discovered the philosopher's
stone to be able to go the pace he does." And when it was known that he
had caused himself to be attached to the legation of France to the court
of Gerolstein, there were not wanting voices to assert that it was a
"devilish good way of making an honourable retreat." Such was M. de
Saint-Remy.

"Allow me," said the Count de ----, presenting M. de Saint-Remy, "to
introduce to your royal highness the Viscount de Saint-Remy, attached to
the embassy of Gerolstein."

The viscount bowed profoundly, saying:

"May I trust your royal highness will deign to pardon my impatience in
requesting the honour of this introduction during the present evening? I
am, perhaps, unduly hasty in my wishes to secure a gratification I have
so long aspired to."

"It will give me much pleasure, my lord, to welcome you to Gerolstein.
Do you propose going thither immediately?"

"Your royal highness being in Paris diminishes very materially my desire
to do so."

"I fear the peaceful contrast of our German courts will scarcely assort
with a life of Parisian fashion, such as you have always been accustomed
to."

"Permit me to assure your royal highness that the gracious kindness you
have now shown me, and which it shall be my study to merit a continuance
of in Gerolstein, would of itself far outweigh any attractions Paris
may have had for me."

"It will not be my fault, my lord, should you see cause to alter your
sentiments when at Gerolstein."

A slight inclination of Rodolph's head announced that the presentation
was concluded, upon which the viscount bowed and retired. The prince, a
practised physiognomist, was subject to involuntary likes and dislikes
upon the first interview with an individual, and these impulses were in
his case almost invariably borne out by after-circumstances. His first
sensation after the exchange of the very few words we have related
between himself and Saint-Remy was an unaccountable feeling of
repugnance and aversion for the gay and fascinating young man; to his
eye, the handsome features wore a sinister look, and danger seemed to
lurk even in his honeyed words and smooth, polished manner.

We shall hereafter meet M. de Saint-Remy under circumstances differing
widely and fearfully from the splendour of the position he occupied at
his first interview with Rodolph. It will then be seen how far these
presentiments were ill or well founded.

The presentation over, Rodolph, in deep meditation upon the singular
rencontres effected by the hand of chance, bent his steps towards the
winter garden. It was now the hour of supper, and the rooms were nearly
deserted. The most retired spot in the hothouse was at the end of a
clump of trees placed against the corner of a wall, and an enormous
banana, covered with climbing plants, effectually concealed a small side
door, masked by the trellis, and conducting to the banquetting-hall by a
long corridor. This door, which was scarcely a yard distant from the
tree above mentioned, had been left temporarily ajar. Sheltered by this
verdant screen, Rodolph seated himself, and was soon lost in a profound
reverie, when the sound of a well-known voice, pronouncing his name,
made Rodolph start. It was Sarah, who, seated with her brother Tom on
the other side of the clump of trees which effectually hid Rodolph from
their view, was conversing with him in the English language. The prince
listened attentively, and the following dialogue ensued:

"The marquise has just gone to show herself for a few minutes at Baron
de Nerval's ball," said Sarah; "she has luckily quitted this place
without once having an opportunity of exchanging a word with Rodolph,
who has been looking everywhere for her. I still dread the influence he
possesses over her, even unknown to herself,--an influence it has cost
me so much labour and difficulty to combat, and partly to destroy.
However, to-morrow will rid me of any further fears of a rival who, if
not effectually destroyed, might so powerfully derange and overthrow my
plans. Listen to me, brother, for it is of serious matters I would speak
to you. To-morrow witnesses the eternal ruin of my hated rival."

"You are mistaken, Sarah," answered Tom's well-remembered voice;
"Rodolph never loved the marquise; of that I am certain; your jealous
fears mislead you."

"It is time," returned Sarah, "that I enlightened you on this subject.
Many things occurred during your last journey, and as it is necessary to
take decisive steps even earlier than I had expected,--nay, this very
night,--so soon as we quit this place, it becomes indispensably
necessary we should take serious counsel together. Happily we are now
quite alone, for the gay butterflies of the night have found fresh
attraction around the supper-tables. Now, then, brother, give your close
and undivided attention to what I am about to say."

"Proceed, I am all impatience."

"Well, before Clémence d'Harville met Rodolph, I feel assured the
passion of love was wholly unknown to her, for what reason I have never
been able to discover. She entertains the most invincible repugnance and
aversion towards her husband, who perfectly adores her. There is some
deep mystery in this part of the business I have never succeeded in
fathoming. A thousand new and delightful emotions sprang up in the
breast of Clémence after she became acquainted with Rodolph; but I
stifled her growing love by the most frightful disclosures, or rather
ingeniously invented calumnies, concerning the prince. Still, the void
in her heart required an object to fill it, and chance having thrown M.
Charles Robert in her way during a morning call she was making at my
house, she appeared struck with his appearance, much after the manner in
which we are attracted by a fine picture. Unfortunately, however, this
man is as silly as he is handsome, though he certainly has a very
prepossessing _tout ensemble_. I praised him enthusiastically to Madame
d'Harville, exalted the nobleness of his sentiments, the elevation of
his mind, and, as I knew her weak side, I worked upon her sympathy and
pity, by representing him as loaded with every trouble and affliction
unrelenting fate could heap upon a devoted but most innocent head. I
directed M. Robert to assume a melancholy and sentimental air; to utter
only deep sighs, and to preserve a gloomy and unbroken silence in the
presence of Madame d'Harville. He carefully pursued the path marked out
by me, and, thanks to his vocal skill, his fine person and the constant
expression of silent suffering, so far engaged the interest of Madame
d'Harville, that, ere long, she transferred to my handsome friend the
warm and sympathising regard Rodolph had first awakened. Do you
comprehend me thus far?"

"Perfectly; proceed."

"Madame d'Harville and Robert met only upon terms of intimacy at my
house; to draw them more effectually together I projected devoting three
mornings in the week to music, and my mournful ally sighed softly as the
breath of evening while turning over the leaves of the music, ventured
to utter a few impassioned words, and even to slip two or three billets
among the pieces he copied out for the marquise to practise at home. I
own I was more fearful of his epistolary efforts than even his powers of
speech; but a woman always looks indulgently upon the first declaration
of love she receives; so far, therefore, the written nonsense of my
silly pupil did no harm, for, in obedience to my advice, his _billets
doux_ were very laconic. The great point was to obtain a rendezvous, and
this was no easy matter, for Clémence's principles were stronger than
her love; or, rather, her passion was not sufficiently deep to induce
her to sacrifice those principles. Unknown, even to herself, the image
of Rodolph still filled her heart, and seemed in a manner to preserve
her from yielding to her weak fancy for M. Charles Robert,--a fancy, as
I well knew, far more imaginary than real; but, led on by my continual
and exaggerated praises of this brainless Apollo, whom I persisted in
describing as suffering under the daily increase of every imaginary evil
I could invent, Clémence, vanquished by the deep despair of her dejected
adorer, consented one day, more from pity than love, to grant him the
rendezvous so long desired."

"Did she, then, make you her confidant?"

"She confessed to me her regard for M. Charles Robert,--nothing more;
neither did I seek to learn more; it would have annoyed and vexed her.
But, as for him, boiling over with love, or, rather, intoxicated with
pride, he came voluntarily to impart his good fortune, without, however,
entrusting me either with the time or place of the intended meeting."

"How, then, did you know it?"

"Why, Karl, by my order, hovered about the door of M. Robert during the
following day from an early hour; nothing, however, transpired till the
next day, when our love-stricken youth proceeded in a _fiacre_ to an
obscure part of the town, and finally alighted before a mean-looking
house in the Rue du Temple; there he remained for an hour and a half,
when he came out and walked away. Karl waited a long while to see
whether any person followed M. Charles Robert out of the house; but no
one came. The marquise had evidently failed in her appointment. This was
confirmed to me on the morrow, when the lover came to pour out all his
rage and disappointment. I advised him to assume even an increase of
wretchedness and despair. The plan succeeded; the pity of Clémence was
again excited; a fresh assignation was wrung from her, but which she
failed to keep equally with the former; the third and last rendezvous,
however, produced more decided effects, Madame d'Harville positively
going as far as the door of the house I have specified as the appointed
place; then, repenting so rash a step, returned home without having even
quitted the humble _fiacre_ in which she rode. You may judge by all
these capricious changes of purpose how this woman struggles to be free.
And wherefore? Why, because (and hence arises my bitter, deadly hatred
to Clémence d'Harville) because the recollection of Rodolph still
lingers in her heart, and, with pertinacious love she shrinks from aught
that she fancies breathes of preference for another; thus shielding
herself from harm or danger beneath his worshipped image. Now this very
night the marquise has made a fresh assignation with M. Charles Robert
for to-morrow, and this time I doubt not her punctuality; the Duke de
Lucenay has so grossly ridiculed this young man that, carried away by
pity for the humiliation of her admirer, the marquise has granted that
to compassion he would not else have obtained. But this time, I feel
persuaded she will keep her word, and be punctual to the appointed time
and hour."

"And how do you propose to act?"

"M. Charles Robert is so perfectly unable to comprehend the delicacy of
feeling which this evening dictated the marquise's resolution of meeting
him, that he is safe to rush with vulgar eagerness to the rendezvous,
and this will effectually ruin his plans, for pity alone has instigated
Clémence to take this compromising step. No love,--no infatuation has
hurried her into a measure so fatal to her future resolution. I know
every turn of her mind; and I am confident she will keep her appointment
solely from a courageous idea of generous devotion, but with a firm
resolve not for one instant to forget her duties as a wife and mother.
Now the coarse, vulgar mind of M. Charles Robert is sure to take the
fullest advantage of the marquise's concession in his favour. Clémence
will detest him from that instant; and the illusion once destroyed which
has bound herself and Charles Robert in bonds of imaginary sympathy, she
will fall again beneath the influence of her love for Rodolph, which I
am certain still nestles in her heart."

"Well?"

"Well! I would have her for ever lost to Rodolph, whose high sense of
honour and deep friendship for M. d'Harville I feel perfectly sure would
not have proved equal to preventing his returning the love of Clémence;
but I will so manage things that he shall henceforward look upon her
with loathing and disgust, as the guilty partner in a crime committed
without his participation. No, no! I know my man. He might pardon the
offence, but never the being excluded from his share in it."

"Then do you propose apprising the husband of all that is going on, so
that the prince should learn the disgraceful circumstances from the
publicity the affair would obtain?"

"I do. And the thing is so much the easier to accomplish as, from what
fell from Clémence to-night, I can learn that the marquis has vague and
undefined suspicions, without knowing on whom to fix them. It is now
midnight; we shall almost directly leave the ball, I will set you down
at the first café we meet with, whence you shall write M. d'Harville a
minute account of his wife's love affair, with the projected assignation
of to-morrow, with the time and place where it is arranged to take
place. Oh! but I forgot, I didn't state that the place of meeting is No.
17 Rue du Temple. And the time, to-morrow at one o'clock. The marquis is
already jealous of Clémence; well, he will by this information surprise
her under most suspicious circumstances; the rest follows as a matter of
course."

"But this is a most abominable mode of action," said Seyton, coldly.

"What! my trusty and well-behaved brother and colleague growing
scrupulous?" said Sarah, sarcastically. "This will never do; suppose my
modes of action are odious,--so be it. I trample on all and every thing
that interferes with my designs,--agreed. I do--I shall, till I have
secured my purpose. But let me ask you, Who thought of scruples when my
destruction was aimed at? Who thought of me or my feelings, let me ask
you? How have I been treated?"

"Say no more, sister,--say no more,--here is my hand, and you may safely
reckon upon my firm participation in all that concerns you, even to
writing the letter to M. d'Harville. But still I say, and repeat, such
conduct is horrible!"

"Never mind sermonising, but say, do you consent fully and entirely to
what I wish you, or do you not? Ay, or nay?"

"Since it must be so, M. d'Harville shall this night be fully instructed
as to all his wife's proceedings,--but--what is that? I fancied I heard
some one on the other side of this thicket,--there was a rustling of
leaves and branches," said Seyton, interrupting himself, and speaking to
Sarah in a low and suppressed voice.

"For heaven's sake," cried Sarah, uneasily, "don't stop to talk about
it, but quick! and examine the other side of this place!"

Seyton rose,--made the tour of the clump of trees,--but saw no one.

Rodolph had just disappeared by the side door, of which we have before
spoken.

"I must have made a mistake," said Seyton, returning; "there is no
appearance of any persons but ourselves being in this place."

"I thought there could not possibly be."

"Now, then, Sarah, hear what I have got to say on the subject of Madame
d'Harville, who, I feel quite satisfied, you make an object of
unnecessary apprehension, as far as it would be possible for her to
interfere with your schemes. The prince, moreover, has certain
principles nothing would induce him to infringe. I am infinitely more
alarmed, and with greater justice, too, as to what can have been his
intentions in conducting that young girl to his farm at Bouqueval, five
or six weeks ago. He is constant in his superintendence of her health
and comfort; is having her well educated, and, moreover, has been
several times to see her. Now we are altogether ignorant who she is or
where she came from; she seems, however, to belong only to the humbler
ranks of society; still, the exquisite style of her beauty, the fact of
the prince having worn the disguise he did when escorting her to the
farm, the increasing interest he seems to take in her welfare, all go to
prove that his regard for her is of no common description. I have,
therefore, in this affair anticipated your wishes; but to remove this
greater, and, as I believe, more serious obstacle to our plans, the
utmost circumspection was requisite to obtain information respecting the
lives and habits of these mysterious occupants of the farm, and
particularly concerning the girl herself. I have been fortunate enough
to learn nearly sufficient to point out what is to be done the moment
for action has arrived. A most singular chance threw that horrid old
woman in my way, to whom, as you remember, I once gave my address,
which she it seems has carefully preserved. Her connection with such
persons as the robber who attacked us during our late visit to the Cité
will powerfully assist us. All is provided for and preconsidered,--there
can be no proof against us,--and, besides, if, as seems evident, this
young creature belongs to the humblest class of society it is not very
probable she will hesitate between our offers and the splendid prospect
she may, perchance, picture to herself, for the prince, I have
ascertained, has preserved a strict incognito towards her. But to-morrow
shall decide the question otherwise,--we shall see,--we shall see."

"And these two obstacles overcome, then, Tom, for our grand project."

"There are many, and serious obstacles in the way; still, they may be
overcome."

"And would it not be a lucky chance if we should bring it to pass at the
very moment when Rodolph would be writhing under the double misery
occasioned by the disclosure of Madame d'Harville's conduct, and the
disappearance of the creature for whom he chooses to evince so deep an
interest? Would not that be an auspicious moment to persuade him that
the daughter, whose loss he daily more and more deplores, still lives?
And then--"

"Silence, sister," interrupted Seyton, "I hear the steps of the guests
from the supper-table, returning to resume the ball. Since you deem it
expedient to apprise the Marquis d'Harville of the morrow's rendezvous,
let us depart; it is past midnight."

"The lateness of the hour in which the anonymous information will reach
M. d'Harville, will but tend still more to impress him with an idea of
its importance."

And with these words Tom and Sarah quitted the splendid ball of the
ambassadress of the court of ----.




CHAPTER II.

THE RENDEZVOUS.


Determined at all risks to warn Madame d'Harville of the danger she was
incurring, Rodolph had quitted the winter garden without waiting to hear
the remainder of the conversation between Sarah and her brother, thus
remaining ignorant of their designs against Fleur-de-Marie, and of the
extreme peril which threatened the poor girl. But, spite of his earnest
desire to apprise the marquise of the plot laid against her peace and
honour, he was unable to carry his design into execution, for Madame
d'Harville, unable to bear up longer after the trying events of the
evening, had abandoned her original intention of visiting the
entertainment given by Madame de Nerval and gone direct home.

This contretemps ruined his hopes. Nearly the whole of the company
present at the ambassadress's ball had been invited to that of Madame de
Nerval's, and Rodolph drove rapidly thither, taking with him M. de
Graün, to whom he gave instructions to look for Madame d'Harville among
the guests, and to acquaint her that the prince, having something of the
utmost consequence to communicate to her without the least delay, would
walk onwards to the Hôtel d'Harville, and await her return home, when he
would say a few words at the carriage-door while her servants were
attending to the opening of the entrance-gates.

After much time spent in fruitless endeavours to find Madame d'Harville,
De Graün was compelled to return with the account of his ill success.
This failure made Rodolph despair of being able, now, to save the
marquise from impending ruin; his first thought had been to warn her of
the treachery intended, and so prevent the statement of Sarah, which he
had no means of keeping from the hands of M. d'Harville, from obtaining
the slightest credence. Alas! it was now too late. The infamous epistle
dictated by the Countess Macgregor had reached the Marquis d'Harville
shortly after midnight on the night in question.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was morning; and M. d'Harville continued slowly to pace his
sleeping-apartment, the bed of which gave no indication of having been
used during the night, though the silken counterpane hung in fragments,
evidently proving that some powerful and devastating storm had possessed
the mind of its owner.

The chamber in question was furnished with elegant simplicity, its only
ornaments consisting of a stand of modern arms and a range of shelves
furnished with a well-chosen collection of books. Yet a sudden frenzy,
or the hand of ungovernable rage, had reduced the quiet elegance which
ordinarily reigned to a scene of frantic disorder. Chairs, tables,
broken and overset; the carpet strewed with fragments of the crystal
lamp kept burning through the night; the wax-lights and gilded
chandelier which had contained them, lying around, gave manifest
evidence of a fearful scene.

M. d'Harville was about thirty years of age, with a fine, manly
countenance, whose usual expression was mild and prepossessing, but now
contracted, haggard, and livid. He had not changed his dress since the
preceding evening; his throat was bare, his waistcoat thrown open, and
on the torn and rumpled cambric of his shirt-front were drops of blood.
His rich, dark hair, which generally fell in curls around his face, now
hung in tangled wildness over his pale countenance. Wholly buried in
the misery of his own thoughts, with folded arms, drooping head, and
fixed, bloodshot eyes, M. d'Harville continued to pace his chamber;
then, stopping opposite his fireplace, in which, spite of the almost
unendurable severity of the frost of the past night, the fire had been
allowed to expire, he took from the marble mantelpiece the following
brief note, which he continued to read over and over with the most eager
attention by the wan, pale light of the cold glimmer of an early winter
morning:

      "To-morrow, at one o'clock, your wife has appointed to meet
    her favoured lover. Go to the Rue du Temple, No. 17, and you
    will obtain every requisite confirmation of this intelligence.

                                     "FROM ONE WHO PITIES YOU."

Whilst reading these words, perused, with such deep anguish and sickness
of heart, so many times through the long midnight hours, the blue, cold
lips of M. d'Harville appeared convulsively to spell each syllable of
this fatal _billet_.

At this moment the chamber door opened and a servant entered; the man
who now made his appearance was old, even gray-headed, but the
expression of his countenance was frank and honest. The noise of the man
entering disturbed not the marquis from his bitter contemplations; he
merely turned his head without altering his position, but still grasped
the letter in his clenched hands.

"What do you want?" inquired he, sternly, of the servant.

The man, instead of answering, continued to gaze with an air of painful
surprise at the disordered state of the room; then, regarding his master
more attentively, exclaimed:

"Blood on your clothes! My lord, my lord! How is this? You have hurt
yourself,--and all alone, too; why, my lord, did you not summon me, as
of old, when these attacks came on?"

"Begone!"

"I entreat your lordship's pardon, but your fire is out,--the cold is
intense,--indeed, I must remind your lordship that after your
late--your--"

"Will you be silent? Leave me I say!"

"Pray do not be angry, my lord," replied the trembling valet; "but, if
your lordship pleases to recollect, you appointed M. Doublet to be here
to-day at half past ten, and he is now waiting with the notary."

"Quite proper," said the marquis, with a bitter smile; "when a man is
rich he ought, he should look carefully to his affairs. Fortune is a
fine thing,--a very fine thing; or would be if it could but purchase
happiness." Then, resuming a cold and collected manner, he added:

"Show M. Doublet into my study."

"I have done so, my lord marquis."

"Then give me my clothes,--quick, I am in haste; I shall be going out
shortly. I--"

"But if your lordship would only--"

"Do as I desire you, Joseph," said M. d'Harville, in a more gentle tone;
then added, "Is your lady stirring yet?"

"I have not yet heard her ladyship's bell, my lord marquis."

"Let me know when she rings."

"I will, my lord."

"Heaven and earth, man, how slow you are!" exclaimed M. d'Harville,
whose raging thoughts almost chafed him into madness; "summon Philip to
assist you; you will keep me all day."

"My lord, please to allow me to set matters a little straight first,"
replied Joseph, sorrowfully; "I would much rather no one but myself
witnessed the state of your chamber, or they would wonder, and talk
about it, because they could not understand what had taken place during
the night, my lord."

"And if they were to find out, it would be a most shocking
affair,--would it not?" asked M. d'Harville, in a tone of gloomy irony.

"Thank God, my lord, not a soul in the house has the least suspicion of
it!"

"No one suspects it," repeated M. d'Harville, despondingly; "no
one,--that's well, for her at least; well, let us hope to keep the
secret."

And, while Joseph was occupying himself in repairing the havoc in his
master's apartment, D'Harville walked up to the stage of arms we before
mentioned, examined them with an expression of deep interest, then,
turning towards Joseph, with a sinister smile, said:

"I hope you have not omitted to clean the guns which are placed at the
top of the stand,--I mean those in my hunting-case."

"I had not your lordship's orders to do so," replied the astonished
servant.

"You had, sir, and have neglected them!"

"I humbly assure you, my lord--"

"They must be in a fine state!"

"Your lordship will please to bear in mind that it is scarcely a month
since they were regularly repaired and put in order for use by the
gunsmith."

"Never mind! As soon as I am dressed reach down my shooting-case; I will
examine the guns myself. I may very possibly go out shooting either
to-morrow or next day."

"I will reach them down directly, my lord."

The chamber being by this time replaced in its ordinary state, a second
_valet de chambre_ was summoned to assist Joseph.

His toilet concluded, M. d'Harville repaired to his study, where the
steward (M. Doublet) and his lawyer's clerk were awaiting him.

"We have brought the agreement that my lord marquis may hear it read
over," said the bowing clerk; "my lord will then only have to sign it,
and the affair is concluded."

"Have you perused it, M. Doublet?"

"I have, my lord, attentively."

"In that case I will affix my signature at once."

The necessary forms completed, the clerk withdrew, when M. Doublet,
rubbing his hands, and looking triumphantly, exclaimed:

"Now, then, by this last addition to your lordship's estates, your
manorial property cannot be less than a hundred and twenty-six thousand
francs per annum, in round numbers. And permit me to say, my lord
marquis, that a rent-roll of a hundred and twenty-six thousand francs
per annum is of no common occurrence nowadays."

"I am a happy man, am I not, M. Doublet? A hundred and twenty-six
thousand livres per annum! Surely the man owning such an income must be
blessed indeed,--sorrow or care cannot reach him through so golden a
shield!"

"And that is wholly independent of my lord's funded property, amounting
at least to two millions more; or reckoning--"

"Exactly; I know what you would say; without reckoning my other
blessings and comforts."

"Why, heaven be praised, your lordship is as rich in all earthly
blessings as in revenue. Not a precious gift but it has been largely
bestowed upon you; ay, and such as even money will not buy: youth,
uninterrupted health, the power of enjoying every happiness, amongst
which, or, rather, at the head of which," said M. Doublet, gracefully
smiling, and gallantly bowing, "place that of being the husband of so
sweet a lady as Madame la Marquise, and the parent of a lovely little
girl, who might be mistaken for a cherubim."

M. d'Harville cast a look of gloomy mistrust on the poor steward; who,
revelling in his own ecstasy at seeing the princely rent-roll committed
to his charge, exceeding all others in magnificent amount, was far from
perceiving the scowling brow of his master, thus congratulated on being
the happiest man alive, when, to his own view, a verier wretch, or more
complete bankrupt in happiness existed not. Striking M. Doublet
familiarly on the shoulder, and breaking into a wild, ironical laugh, M.
d'Harville rejoined:

"Then you think that with an income of two hundred and sixty thousand
livres, a wife like mine, and a daughter resembling a cherubim, a man
has nothing more to wish for?"

"Nay, my lord," replied the steward, with honest zeal, "you have still
to wish for the blessing of lengthened days, that you may be spared to
see mademoiselle married as happily as yourself. Ah, my lord, I may not
hope to see it, but I should be thankful to witness you and my honoured
lady surrounded by your grandchildren,--ay, and great-grandchildren
too,--why not?"

"Excellent, M. Doublet! A regular Baucis and Philemon idea. You have
always a capital illustration to your ideas."

"You are too good to me, my lord. Has your lordship any further orders
for me?"

"None. Stay, though; what cash have you in hand?"

"Twenty-nine thousand three hundred and odd francs for current expenses,
my lord marquis; but there is a heavy sum at the bank belonging to this
quarter's income."

"Well, bring me twenty thousand francs in gold, and, should I have gone
out, give them to Joseph for me."

"Does your lordship wish for them this morning?"

"I do."

"Within an hour the gold shall be here. You have nothing else to say to
me, my lord?"

"No, M. Doublet."

"A hundred and twenty-six thousand francs per annum, wholly
unincumbered," repeated the steward, as he was about to quit the room;
"this is a glorious day for me to see; I almost feared at one time that
we should not secure this desirable property. Your lordship's most
humble servant, I take my leave."

"Good morning, M. Doublet."

As the door closed upon the steward, M. d'Harville, overcome with the
mental agony he had repressed thus far, threw himself into an armchair,
leaned his elbows on the desk before which he sat, and covering his face
with his hands, for the first time since receiving the fatal _billet_,
gave vent to a flood of hot, burning tears.

"Cruel mockery of fate!" cried he, at length, "to have made me rich, but
to have given me only shame and dishonour to place within the gilded
frame: the perjury of Clémence, the disgrace which will descend upon my
innocent child. Can I suffer this? Or shall I for the sake of her
unoffending offspring spare the guilty mother from the opprobrium of an
exposure?" Then rising suddenly from his seat, with sparkling eyes and
clenched teeth he cried, in a deep, determined voice, "No, no! Blood,
blood! The fearful protection from laughter and derision. Ah, full well
I can now comprehend her coldness, her antipathy, wretched, wretched
woman!" Then, stopping all at once, as though melted by some tender
recollection, he resumed, in a hoarse tone, "Aversion! Alas! too well I
know its cause. I inspire her with loathing, with disgust!" Then, after
a lengthened silence, he cried, in a voice broken by sighs, "Yet, was it
my fault or my misfortune? Should she have wronged me thus for a
calamity beyond my power to avert? Surely I am a more fitting object for
her pity than scorn and hatred." Again rekindling into his excited
feelings, he reiterated, "Nothing but blood--the blood of both--can wash
out this guilty stain! Doubtless he, the favoured lover, has been
informed why she flies her husband's arms."

This latter thought redoubled the fury of the marquis. He elevated his
tightly compressed hands towards heaven, as though invoking its
vengeance; then, passing his burning fingers over his eyes as he
recollected the necessity that existed for concealing his emotion from
the servants of his establishment, he returned to his sleeping-apartment
with an appearance of perfect tranquillity. There he found Joseph.

"Well, in what state are the guns?"

"In perfect order. Please to examine them, my lord."

"I came for the purpose of so doing. Has your lady yet rung?"

"I do not know, my lord."

"Then inquire."

Directly the servant had quitted the room, M. d'Harville hastily took
from the gun-case a small powder-flask, some balls and caps; then,
locking the case, put the key in his pocket. Then going to the stand of
arms, he took from it a pair of moderate-sized Manton's pistols, loaded
them, and placed them without difficulty in the pockets of his morning
wrapper. Joseph returned with the intimation that Madame d'Harville was
in her dressing-room.

"Has your lady ordered her carriage?"

"My lord, I heard Mlle. Juliette say to the head-coachman, when he came
to inquire her ladyship's orders for the day, that, 'as it was cold, dry
walking, if her ladyship went out at all, she would prefer going on
foot.'"

"Very well. Stay,--I forgot. I shall not go out hunting before
to-morrow, or probably, next day. Desire Williams to look the small
travelling-britcska carefully over. Do you understand?"

"Perfectly, my lord; it shall be attended to. Will not your lordship
require a stick?"

"No. Pray tell me, is there not a hackney coach-stand near here?"

"Quite close, my lord,--in the Rue de Lille."

After a moment's hesitation, the marquis continued: "Go and inquire of
Mlle. Juliette whether Madame d'Harville can see me for a few minutes."
Joseph obeyed.

"Yes," murmured the marquis, "I will see the cause of all my misery,--my
disgrace. I will contemplate the guilty mask beneath which the impure
heart conceals its adulterous designs. I will listen to the false lips
that speak the words of innocence, while deep dishonour lurks in the
candid smile,--a smile that seemed to me as that of an angel. Yet 'tis
an appalling spectacle to watch the words, the looks, of one who,
breathing only the sentiments of a chaste wife and mother, is about to
sully your name with one of those deep, deadly stains which can only be
washed out in blood. Fool that I am to give her the chance of again
bewildering my senses! She will look at me with her accustomed sweetness
and candour; greet me (all guilty as she is) with the same pure smile
she bestows upon her child, as, kneeling at her lap, it lisps its early
prayer. That look,--those eyes, mirrors of the soul,--the more modest
and pure the glance" (D'Harville shuddered with contempt) "the greater
must be the innate corruption and falsehood! Alas! she has proved
herself a consummate dissembler; and I--I--have been the veriest dupe!
Only let me consider with what sentiments must that woman look upon me,
if just previous to her meeting with her favoured lover I pay her my
accustomed visit, and express my usual devotion and love for her,--the
young, the virtuous wife, the tender, sensible, and devoted mother, as
until this wretched moment I would have died to prove her. Can I, dare
I, trust myself in her presence, with the knowledge of her being but too
impatient for the arrival of that blessed hour which conveys her to her
guilty rendezvous and infamous paramour? Oh, Clémence, Clémence, you in
whom all my hopes and fondest affections were placed, is this a just
return? No! no! no!" again repeated M. d'Harville, with rapidly
returning excitement. "False, treacherous woman! I will not see you! I
will not trust my ears to your feigned words! Nor you, my child. At the
sight of your innocent countenance I should unman myself, and compromise
my just revenge."

Quitting his apartment, M. d'Harville, instead of repairing to those of
the marquise, contented himself with leaving a message for her through
Mlle. Juliette, to the effect that he wished a short conversation with
Madame d'Harville, but that being obliged to go out just then, he should
be glad, if it assorted with Madame la Marquise's perfect convenience,
to breakfast with her at twelve o'clock.

"And so," said the unhappy M. d'Harville, "fancying that after twelve
o'clock I shall be safe at home, she will consider herself more at
liberty to follow out her own plans."

He then repaired to the coach-stand contiguous to his mansion, and
summoned a vehicle from the ranks.

"Now, coachee," said he, affecting to disguise his rank, "what's
o'clock?"

"All right, master," said the man, drawing up to the side of the
footway, "where am I to drive to? Let's have a right understanding, and
a look at the clock. Why, it's as close on half-after eleven as may be."

"Now, then, drive to the corner of the Rue St. Dominique, and wait at
the end of the garden wall which runs along there; do you understand?"

"Yes, yes,--I know."

M. d'Harville then drew down the blinds of the _fiacre_; the coachman
drove on, and soon arrived opposite the Hôtel d'Harville, from which
point of observation it was impossible for any person to enter or quit
the house without the marquis having a full view of them. One o'clock
was the hour fixed in the note; and with his eyes riveted on the
entrance-gates of the mansion, the marquis waited in painful suspense,
absorbed in a whirl of fearful thoughts and maddening conjectures. Time
stole on imperceptibly; twelve o'clock reverberated from the dome of St.
Thomas Aquinas, when the door opened slowly at the Hôtel d'Harville, and
Madame d'Harville herself came timidly forth.

"Already?" exclaimed the unhappy husband; "how punctual she is! She
fears to keep him waiting," cried the marquis, with a mixture of irony
and savage rage.

The cold was excessive; the pavement hard and dry. Clémence was dressed
in a black velvet bonnet, covered with a veil of the same colour, and a
thickly wadded pelisse of dark ruby satin, a large shawl of dark blue
cashmere fell to the very hem of her pelisse, which she lightly and
gracefully held up while crossing the street. Thanks to this movement,
the taper foot and graceful ankle of Madame d'Harville, cased in an
exquisitely fitting boot of black satin, were exposed to view.

It was strange, that amid the painful and bewildering ideas that crowded
the brain of D'Harville, he should have found one thought to waste upon
the beauty of his wife's foot; but so it was; and at the moment that was
about to separate them for ever, to his eager gaze that fairy foot and
well-turned ankle had never looked so charming; and then, as by a rapid
train of thought he recalled the matchless loveliness of his wife, and,
as he had ever believed till now, her purity, her mental graces, he
groaned aloud as he remembered that another was preferred to him, and
that the light figure that glided on before his fixed gaze, was but the
hollow spectre of fallen goodness, a lost, degraded creature, hastening
to steep her husband and infant in irremediable disgrace, for the
indulging of a base and guilty passion. Even in that wretched moment he
felt how dearly, how exclusively he had loved her; and for the first
time during the blow which had fallen on him, he knew that he mourned
the lovely woman almost equally with the virtuous mother and chaste
wife. A cry of rage and mingled fury escaped him, as he pictured the
rapture of her meeting with the lover of her choice; and a sharp,
darting pain quivered through his heart as he remembered that Clémence,
with all her youth and beauty, her countless charms, both of body and
mind, was lost to him for ever.

Hitherto his passionate grief had been unmixed by any alloy of self. He
had bewailed the sanctity of the marriage-vow trampled under foot, the
abandonment of all sworn and sacred duties; but his sufferings of rage,
jealousy, and regret almost overpowered him, and with much difficulty
was he able to command his voice sufficiently to say to the coachman,
while partially drawing up the blind:

"Do you see that lady in the blue shawl and black bonnet walking along
by the wall?"

"Yes, yes! I see her safe enough."

"Well, then, go slowly along, and keep up with her. Should she go to the
coach-stand I had you from, pull up; and when she has got into a
_fiacre_, follow it wherever it goes."

"All right,--I understand! Now this is what I call a good joke!"

M. d'Harville had conjectured rightly. Madame d'Harville repaired
directly to the coach-stand, and beckoning a _fiacre_ off the stand,
instantly got in, and drove off, closely followed by the vehicle
containing her husband.

They had proceeded but a very short distance, when the coachman took the
road to the church of St. Thomas Aquinas, and, to the surprise of M.
d'Harville, pulled up directly in front.

"What is this for? What are you about?"

"Why, master, the lady you told me to follow has just alighted here, and
a smart, tidy leg and foot of her own she has got. Her dress somehow
caught; so, you see, I couldn't help having a peep, nohow. This is
downright good fun though, this is!"

A thousand varied thoughts agitated M. d'Harville. One minute he fancied
that his wife, fearing pursuit, had taken this step to escape detection;
then hope whispered that the letter which had given him so much
uneasiness, might after all be only an infamous calumny; for if guilty,
what could be gained by this false assumption of piety? Would it not be
a species of sacrilegious mockery? At this suggestion a bright ray of
hope shot across the troubled mind of M. d'Harville, arising from the
striking contrast between Clémence's present occupation and the crime
alleged as her motive for quitting her home. Alas! this consolatory
illusion was speedily destroyed. Leaning in at the open window the
coachman observed:

"I say, master, that nice little woman you are after has got back into
her coach."

"Then follow quickly."

"I'm off! Now this is what I call downright good fun. Capital; hang me
if it ain't!"

The vehicle reached the Quais, the Hôtel de Ville, the Rue St. Avoye,
and, at last, Rue du Temple.

"I say," said the coachman, turning round to speak to M. d'Harville from
his seat, "master, just look. My mate, there, has stopped at No. 17; we
are about at 13. Shall I stop here or go on to 17?"

"Stop here."

"I say,--look'ee,--you'll lose your pretty lady. She has gone into the
alley leading to No. 17."

"Open the door."

"I'm coming, sir."

And quickly following the steps of his wife, M. d'Harville entered the
obscure passage up which she had disappeared. Madame d'Harville,
however, had so far the start as to have entered the house previously.

Attracted by the most devouring curiosity, Madame Pipelet, with her
melancholy Alfred and her friend the oyster-woman, were huddled close
together on the sill at the lodge door. The staircase was so dark that a
person just emerging from the daylight into the gloom of the passage
could not discern a single step of it; and Madame d'Harville, agitated
and almost sinking with apprehension, found herself constrained to apply
to Madame Pipelet for further advice how to proceed, saying, in a low,
tremulous voice:

"Which way must I turn, madame, to find the staircase of the house?"

"Stop, if you please. Pray, whom do you want?"

"I wish to go to the apartments of M. Charles, madame."

"Monsieur who?" repeated the old woman, feigning not to have heard her,
but in reality to afford sufficient leisure to her husband and her
friend thoroughly to scrutinise the unhappy woman's countenance, even
through the folds of her thick veil.

"M. Charles, madame," repeated Clémence, in a low, trembling tone, and
bending down her head, so as to escape the rude and insolent examination
to which her features were subjected.

"Ah! M. Charles; very well; you should have spoken so that one could
hear you. Well, my pretty dear, if you want M. Charles,--and a
good-looking fellow he is as ever won a woman's heart,--go straight on,
and the door will stare you in the face. Eh! eh! eh!" laughed out the
old woman, shaking her fat sides with spiteful glee, "it seems he has
not waited for nothing this time. Success to love and love-makings, and
a merry end to it!"

The marquise, ready to sink with confusion, began slowly to grope her
way up the dingy staircase.

"I say," bawled out the old shell-fish woman, "our commandant knows what
he is about, don't he? Leave him alone to choose a pretty girl. His marm
is a regular swell, ain't she?"

Had it not been requisite for her to run the gauntlet of the trio who
occupied the entrance-door, Madame d'Harville, ready to sink with shame
and terror, would gladly have retraced her steps. She made another
effort, and at last reached the landing-place, where, to her unutterable
consternation and surprise, she saw Rodolph waiting, impatiently, her
arrival. Instantly flying to meet her, he hastily placed a purse in her
hand, saying, in a hurried manner:

"Your husband knows all, and is now following your very steps."

At this instant, the sharp tones of Madame Pipelet were heard crying
out, "Where are you going to, sir?"

"'Tis he!" exclaimed Rodolph, and then, almost forcing Madame d'Harville
up the second staircase, he added, in a rapid manner, "make all haste to
the very top of the house; on the fifth floor you will find a wretched
family, named Morel. Remember your sole business in coming hither was to
relieve their distress."

"I tell you, sir," screamed Madame Pipelet, "that unless you tell me
your name, you shall trample over me, as they walked over our brave men
at Waterloo, before I let you pass."

Having, from the entrance to the alley, observed Madame d'Harville stop
to speak to the porteress, the marquis had likewise prepared himself to
pass through some sort of questioning.

"I belong to the lady who just now entered," said the marquis.

"Bless me!" exclaimed Madame Pipelet, looking the picture of wonderment,
"why, that, of course, is a satisfactory answer. You can pass on, if you
please."

Hearing an unusual stir, M. Charles Robert had set the door of his
apartments ajar, and Rodolph, unwilling to be recognised by M.
d'Harville, whose quick, searching eye might have detected him, spite of
the murkiness of the staircase, hearing him rapidly ascending the
stairs, just as he reached the landing-place, dashed into the chamber of
the astonished commandant, locking the door after him. M. Charles
Robert, magnificently attired in his _robe de chambre_ of scarlet damask
with orange-coloured stripes, and Greek cap of embroidered velvet, was
struck with astonishment at the unexpected appearance of Rodolph, whom
he had not seen the preceding evening at the embassy, and who was upon
the present occasion very plainly dressed.

"What is the meaning of this intrusion?" asked he at length, assuming a
tone of killing haughtiness.

"Be silent!" replied Rodolph; and there was that in his voice and manner
that Charles Robert obeyed, even in spite of his own determination to
strike terror into the bold invader of his private moments.

A violent and continued noise, as of some heavy substance falling from
one stair to the other, resounded through the dull silence of the gloomy
staircase.

"Unhappy man! He has murdered her!" exclaimed Rodolph.

"Murdered!" ejaculated M. Charles Robert, turning very pale; "for the
love of Heaven, what is all this about?"

But, without heeding his inquiry, Rodolph partially opened the door, and
discovered little Tortillard half rolling, half limping, down the
stairs, holding in his hand the red silk purse Rodolph had just given to
Madame d'Harville. Tortillard, with another scrambling shuffle,
disappeared at the bottom of the last flight of stairs. The light step
of Madame d'Harville, and the heavier tread of her husband, as he
continued his pursuit of her from one story to another, could be
distinctly heard. Somewhat relieved of his worst fears, yet unable to
make out by what chance the purse so recently committed to Madame
d'Harville's hands should have been transferred to those of Tortillard,
Rodolph said, authoritatively, to M. Robert:

"Do not think of quitting your apartments for the next hour, I request!"

"Upon my life and soul, that is a pretty thing to say to a gentleman in
his own house," replied M. Robert in an impatient and wrathful tone. "I
ask you, again, what is the meaning of all this? Who the devil are you,
sir? And how dare you dictate to me, a gentleman?"

"M. d'Harville is informed of everything,--has followed his wife to your
very door,--and is now pursuing her to the upper part of the house."

"God bless me! Here's a situation!" exclaimed Charles Robert, with an
appearance of utter consternation. "But what is to be done? What is the
use of her going up-stairs? And how will she manage to get down again
unobserved?"

"Remain where you are, neither speak nor move until the porteress comes
to you," rejoined Rodolph, who hastened to give his final instructions
to Madame Pipelet, leaving the commandant a prey to the most alarming
apprehensions.

"Well! well!" cried Madame Pipelet, her face radiant with chuckling
exultation; "there's rare sport going on! The lady who came to visit my
fine gentleman on the first floor has been followed by another
gentleman, who seems rather in a passion,--the husband of that silly
young creature, I make no doubt. Directly the truth flashed across me, I
tells him to go straight up; for, thinks I, he'll be sure to murder our
commandant. That'll make a deal of talk in the neighbourhood; and folks
will come crowding to see the house, just as they did at No. 36 after
the man was killed there. Lord! I wonder the fighting has not begun
yet. I have been listening to hear them set to; but I can't catch the
least sound."

"My dear Madame Pipelet, will you do me a great favour?" said Rodolph,
putting five louis into her hand. "When this lady comes down-stairs, ask
her how she found the poor Morels. Tell her she has performed an act of
real charity in coming to see them, according to her promise, the last
time she called to inquire respecting them."

Madame Pipelet looked first at the money and then at Rodolph, with an
air of petrified astonishment.

"What am I to do with this money?" inquired she, at length; "do you give
it to me? Ah, I see! This handsome lady, then, does not come altogether
for the commandant?"

"The gentleman who followed her was her husband, as you justly supposed;
but, being warned in time, the poor lady went straight on to the Morels,
as though her only business here was to afford them succour. Now do you
understand!"

"I should think I did,--clear as noonday. 'A nod is as good as a wink,'
as the old woman said. I know! You want me to help you cheat the
husband? Lord bless you! I'm up to all those things,--quick as
lightning, silent as the grave! Go along with you! I'm a regular good
hand at keeping husbands in the dark; you might fancy I'd been used to
it all my life. But tell me--"

The huge hat of M. Pipelet was here observed sending its dark shadow
across the floor of the lodge.

"Anastasie," said Alfred, gravely, "you are like M. César Bradamanti;
you have no respect for anything or anybody. And let me tell you that
there are subjects that should never be made the subject of a jest, even
amongst the most familiar acquaintances."

"Nonsense, my old darling. Don't stand there rolling up your eyes, and
looking about as wise as a pig in a pound. You know well enough I was
only joking; you know well enough that no living soul beneath the canopy
of heaven can ever say I gave him a liberty. But that'll do; so let's
talk of this good gentleman's business. Suppose I do go out of my usual
way to save this young lady, I'm sure I do it solely to oblige our new
lodger, who, for his generosity, may well deserve to be called the king
of lodgers." Then, turning towards Rodolph, she added, "You shall see
how cleverly I will go to work. Just hide yourself there in that corner
behind the curtain. Quick,--quick! I hear them coming."

Rodolph had scarcely time to conceal himself ere M. and Madame
d'Harville descended the stairs. The features of the marquis shone with
happiness, mingled with a confused and astonished expression, while the
countenance of his wife, as she hung on his arm, looked calm but pale.

"Well, my good lady," cried Madame Pipelet, going out of her lodge to
address her, as she descended the last stair, "how did you find the poor
creatures,--I mean the Morels? Ah, I doubt not, such a sight made your
heart ache? God knows your charity was well bestowed! I told you the
other day, when you called to inquire about them, what a state of
starvation and misery they were in. Be assured, kind lady, these poor
things are fit objects of your bounty; you will never have to regret
coming to this out-of-the-way place to examine into their case. They
really are deserving all your kindness,--don't you think so, Alfred?"

Alfred, the strictness of whose ideas touching a due regard for all
conjugal duties made him revolt at the thoughts of helping to deceive a
husband, replied only by a sort of grumbling sound, as vague as
discordant.

"Please to excuse my husband, madame," resumed Madame Pipelet; "he has
got the cramp in his stomach, and cannot speak loud enough to be
understood, or he would tell you as well as myself that the poor people
you have so fortunately relieved will pray of the Almighty, night and
day, to bless and reward you, my worthy lady."

M. d'Harville gazed on his wife with feelings approaching to adoration,
as he exclaimed, "Angel of goodness, how has base slander dared to
disturb your heavenly work!"

"An angel!" repeated Madame Pipelet; "that she is, and one of the very
best heaven could send. There is not a better."

"Let us return home, I entreat!" said Madame d'Harville, who was
suffering acutely under the restraint she had put upon herself since
entering the house, and, now that the necessity for exertion was over,
found her strength rapidly forsaking her.

"Instantly," replied the marquis.

At the instant of their emerging into the open air from the obscurity of
the alley, M. d'Harville, observing the pale looks of his wife, said,
tenderly:

"Ah, Clémence, I have deep cause to solicit your pity and forgiveness."

"Alas! my lord," said the marquise, sighing deeply, "which of us has not
need of pardon?"

Rodolph quitted his hiding-place, deeply ruminating upon so terrible a
scene, thus intermingled with absurdity and coarseness, and pondering
over the curious termination to a drama, the commencement of which had
called forth such different passions.

"Well, now," exclaimed Madame Pipelet, "you must say I played my part
well. Didn't I send that donkey of a husband home with longer ears than
he came out with? Lord bless you! he'll put his wife under a glass case,
and worship her from this day forward. Poor, dear gentleman! I really
could not help feeling sorry for him. Oh! but about your furniture, M.
Rodolph; it has not come yet."

"I am now going to see about it. By the by, you had better go and inform
the commandant that he may venture out."

"True; I'll go and let the caged bird out. But what stuff and nonsense
for him to hire apartments of no more use to him than they are to the
King of Prussia! He is a fine fellow, he is, with his paltry twelve
francs a month. This is the fourth time he has been made a fool of."

Rodolph quitted the house, and Madame Pipelet, turning to her husband,
said, with a chuckling laugh, "Now, Alfred, the commandant's turn has
come; now for it! I mean to have a jolly good laugh at my gentleman,--up
and dressed for nothing."

Arrived at the apartments of M. Charles Robert, the porteress rang the
bell; the door was opened by the commandant himself.

"Commandant," said Anastasie, giving him a military salute, by placing
the back of her little fat hand against the front of her wig, "I have
come to set you free. Your friends have gone away arm in arm, happy as
doves, under your very nose. Well, you are out of a nice mess, thanks to
M. Rodolph. You ought to stand something very handsome to him for all he
has done upon the present occasion."

"Then this slim individual with the moustachios is called M. Rodolph, is
he?"

"Exactly so; neither more nor less."

"And who and what is the fellow?"

"Fellow, indeed!" cried Madame Pipelet, in a wrathful voice; "he is as
good as other men,--better than some I could mention. Why, he is a
travelling clerk, but the very king of lodgers; for, though he has only
one room, he does not haggle and beat folks down,--not he. Why, he gave
me six francs for doing for him,--six francs, mind, I say, without a
word. Think of that!--without ever offering me a sou less. Oh, he is a
lodger! I wish other people were at all like him!"

"There, there, that's enough; take the key."

"Shall I light the fire to-morrow, commandant?"

"No!"

"Next day?"

"No, no! Don't bother me."

"I say, commandant, if you recollect, I warned you that you would have
your trouble for your pains."

M. Charles Robert threw a glance at his grinning tormentor that spoke of
annihilation at least, and, dashing furiously by her, quitted the house,
wondering much how a mere clerk should have become acquainted with his
assignation with the Marquise d'Harville.

As the commandant left the alley, Tortillard came hobbling along.

"Well, what do you want?" said Madame Pipelet.

"Has the Borgnesse been to call upon me?" asked the young scamp, without
attending to the porteress's question.

"The Chouette? No, you ugly monster! What should she come for?"

"Why, to take me with her into the country, to be sure," said
Tortillard, swinging on the lodge gate.

"And what does your master say to it?"

"Oh, father managed all that. He sent this morning to M. Bradamanti, to
ask him to give me leave to go in the country,--the country,--the
country," sang or rather screamed the amiable scion of M. Bras Rouge,
beating time most melodiously on the window-panes.

"Will you leave off, you young rascal, or are you going to break my
window? Oh, here comes a coach!"

"Oh! oh! oh!" shrieked the urchin; "it is my dear Chouette! Oh, how nice
the ride in a coach!"

And, looking through the window, they saw reflected upon the red blind
of the opposite glass the hideous profile of the Borgnesse. She beckoned
to Tortillard, who ran out to her. The coachman descended from his box,
and opened the door; Tortillard sprang into the vehicle, which instantly
drove off.

Another person beside the Chouette was in the carriage. In the farther
corner, and wrapped in an old cloak with a furred collar, his features
shrouded by a black silk cap pulled down over his brows, sat the
Schoolmaster. His inflamed lids formed a horrible contrast with the
white globeless space beneath; and this fearful spectacle was rendered
still more hideous by the action of the severe cold upon his seamed and
frightful countenance.

"Now, small boy, squat yourself down on the pins of my man; you'll serve
to keep him warm," said the Borgnesse to Tortillard, who crouched like a
dog close to the feet of the Schoolmaster and the Chouette.

"Now, then, my coves," said the driver, "on we go to the 'ken' at
Bouqueval, don't we, La Chouette? You shall see whether I can 'tool a
drag' or not."

"And keep your pads on the move, my fine fellow; for we must get hold of
the girl to-night."

"All right, my blind un; we'll go the pace."

"Shall I give you a hint?" said the Schoolmaster.

"What about?"

"Why, cut it fine as you pass by the 'nabs' at the barrier; the meeting
might lead to disagreeable recollections. It is not every old
acquaintance it is worth while to renew our friendship with. You have
been wanted at the barriers for some time."

"I'll keep my weather-eye open," replied the driver, getting on his box.

It needs scarcely be told, after this specimen of slang, that the
coachman was a robber, one of the Schoolmaster's worthy associates. The
vehicle then quitted the Rue du Temple.

Two hours afterwards, towards the closing of a winter's day, the vehicle
containing the Chouette, the Schoolmaster, and Tortillard, stopped
before a wooden cross, marking out the sunken and lonely road which
conducted to the farm at Bouqueval, where the Goualeuse remained under
the kind protection of Madame Georges.




CHAPTER III.

AN IDYL.


The hour of five had just struck from the church clock of the little
village of Bouqueval; the cold was intense, the sky clear, the sun,
sinking slowly behind the vast leafless woods which crowned the heights
of Ecouen, cast a purple hue over the horizon, and sent its faint,
sloping rays across the extensive plains, white and hard with winter's
frost.

In the country each season has its own distinctive features, its own
peculiar charm; at times the dazzling snow changes the whole scene into
immense landscapes of purest alabaster, exhibiting their spotless
beauties to the reddish gray of the sky. Then may be seen in the glimmer
of twilight, either ascending or descending the hill, a benighted farmer
returning to his habitation; his horse, cloak, and hat, are covered with
the falling snow. Bitter is the cold, biting the north wind, dark and
gloomy the approaching night; but what cares he? There, amid those
leafless trees, he sees the bright taper burning in the window of his
cheerful home; while from the tall chimney a column of dark smoke rolls
upwards through the flaky shower that descends, and speaks to the
toil-worn farmer of a blazing hearth and humble meal prepared by kind
affection to welcome him after the fatigues of his journey. Then the
rustic gossip by the fireside, on which the fagot burns and crackles,
and a peaceful, comfortable night's rest, amid the whistling of the
winds, and the barking of the various dogs at the different farms
scattered around, with the answering cry from the distant watch-dog.

Daylight opens upon a scene of fairy-land. Surely the tiny elves have
been celebrating some grand fête, and have left some of their adornments
behind them, for on each branch hang long spiracles of crystal,
glittering in the rays of a winter's sun with all the prismatic
brilliancy of the diamond. The damp, rich soil of the arable land is
laid down in furrows, where hides the timid hare in her form, or the
speckled partridge runs merrily. Here and there is heard the melancholy
tinkling of the sheep-bell hanging from the neck of some important
leader of the numerous flocks scattered over the verdant heights and
turfy valleys of the neighbourhood; while, carefully wrapped in his dark
gray cloak, the shepherd, seated under shelter of those knotted trunks
and interlaced branches, chants his cheerful lay, while his fingers are
busily employed weaving a basket of rushes.

Occasionally a more animated scene presents itself; distant echo gives
out the faint sound of the hunting-horn, and the cry of hounds; suddenly
a frightened deer bursts from the neighbouring forest, stands for a few
seconds in terrified alarm upon the frozen plain, then darts onward, and
is quickly lost amid the thickets on the opposite side. The trampling of
horses, the barking of dogs, are rapidly brought nearer by the breeze;
and now, in their turn, a pack of dogs with brown and tawny-spotted
skins issue from the brushwood from which the frightened deer but just
now came; they run eagerly over the sterile ground, the fallow fields,
with noses closely pointed to the ground they pursue with loud cries the
traces left by the flying deer. At their heels come the hunters in their
scarlet coats, bending over the necks of their swift steeds; they
encourage their dogs by their voices mingled with the notes of the horn.
Swift as lightning the brilliant cortège passes on; the noise
decreases; by degrees all is still; dogs, horses, and huntsmen are lost
in the tangled mazes of the forest, where the frightened stag had sought
and found a hiding-place. Then peace and calm resumed their reign; and
the profound stillness of these vast plains was interrupted only by the
monotonous song of the shepherd.

These sights,--these rustic views abounded in the environs of the
village of Bouqueval, which, spite of its proximity to Paris, was
situated in a sort of desert, to which there was no approach except by
cross-roads. Concealed during the summer among the trees, like a nest
amid the sheltering foliage, the farm which had become the home of the
poor Goualeuse was now utterly bereft of its leafy screen, and entirely
exposed to view. The course of the little river, now quite frozen over,
resembled a long silver riband stretched along the ever verdant meadows,
through which a number of fine cows were leisurely wending their way to
their stable. Brought home by the approach of night, flocks of pigeons
were successively arriving, and perching on the peaked roof of the
dove-house; while the immense walnut-tree, that during the summer
afforded an umbrageous screen both to the farmhouse and its numerous
out-buildings, stripped of its rich foliage, exhibited only bare
branches, through which could plainly be discerned the tiled roof of the
one, and the thatched tops of the others, overgrown with patches of moss
of mingled green and dingy brown.

A heavy cart, drawn by three strong, sturdy horses, with long, thick
manes and shining coats, with blue collars ornamented with bells and
tassels of red worsted, was bringing in a load of wheat from a
neighbouring rick. This ponderous machine entered the courtyard by the
large gate, while immense flocks of sheep were pressing eagerly round
the side entrances; both men and beasts appeared impatient to escape
from the severity of the cold, and to enjoy the comfort of repose. The
horses neighed joyously at the sight of their stable, the sheep bleated
their satisfaction at returning to their warm folds, while the hungry
labourers cast a longing look towards the kitchen windows, from which
streamed forth pleasant promise of a warm and savoury meal.

The whole of the exterior arrangements of the farm were indicative of
the most scrupulous order, neatness, and exactitude. Instead of being
covered with dirt and dust, scattered about, and exposed to the
inclemency of the season, the carts, rollers, harrows, etc., with every
agricultural implement (and some were of the last and best invention),
were placed, well cleaned and painted, under a vast shed, where the
carters were accustomed to arrange their cart-harness with the most
symmetrical attention to order and method. Large, clean, and well laid
out, the court-yard had none of those huge dung-heaps, those stagnant
pools of filthy water, which deface the finest establishments of La
Beauce or La Brie.

The poultry-yard, surrounded by a green trellising, received and shut in
all the feathered tribe, who after wandering in the fields all day,
returned home by a small door left open till all were collected, when it
was carefully closed and secured. Without dwelling too minutely upon
every detail, we shall merely observe, that in all respects this farm
passed most justly in the environs for a model farm, as much for the
excellency of the method by which it was conducted, and the abundant
crops it produced, as for the respectability and correct mode of life
which distinguished the various labourers employed there, who were soon
ranked among the most creditable and efficient workmen of the place.

The cause of all this prosperity shall be spoken of hereafter. Meanwhile
we will conduct the reader to the trellised gate of the poultry-yard,
which, for the rustic elegance of its perches and poultry-houses, was
noways inferior to the farm itself; while through the centre flowed a
small stream of clear, limpid water, the bed of which was laid down
with smooth pebbles, carefully cleansed from any obstructing substance.

A sudden stir arose among the winged inhabitants of this charming spot;
the fowls flew fluttering and cackling from their perches, the turkeys
gabbled, the guinea-fowls screamed, and the pigeons, forsaking their
elevated position on the summit of the dove-house, descended to the
sandy surface of the yard, and stood cooing and caressing each other
with every manifestation of joy. The arrival of Fleur-de-Marie had
occasioned all these ecstatic delights.

A more charming model than the Goualeuse could not have been desired by
Greuze or Watteau, had her cheeks possessed a little more _rondeur_ or
been visited by a brighter tinge; but, spite of their delicate paleness,
the expression of her features, the _tout ensemble_ of her figure, and
the gracefulness of her attitude would have rendered her worthy of
exercising the crayons of even the celebrated artists we have alluded
to.

The small round cap of Fleur-de-Marie displayed her fair forehead and
light, braided hair, in common with all the young girls in the environs
of Paris; above this cap, but still exposing the crown and ears, she
wore a large red cotton handkerchief, folded smoothly, and pinned behind
her head; while the long ends waving gracefully over her shoulders
formed a costume which, for graceful effect, might be envied by the
tasteful _coiffeurs_ of Italy or Switzerland. A handkerchief of
snow-white linen, crossed over her bosom, was half concealed by the high
and spreading front of her coarse cloth apron. A jacket of blue woollen
cloth with tight sleeves displayed her slender figure, and descended
half way down her thick skirt of dark-striped fustian; white cotton
stockings and tied shoes, partly covered by sabots, furnished with a
leather strap for the instep, completed this costume of rustic
simplicity, to which the natural grace of Fleur-de-Marie lent an
inexpressible charm.

Holding in one hand the two corners of her apron, with the other she
distributed handfuls of grain among the winged crowd by which she was
surrounded. One beautiful pigeon of a silvery whiteness, with beak and
feet of a rich purple colour, more presuming or more indulged than the
rest, after having flown several times around Fleur-de-Marie, at length
alighted on her shoulder; the young girl, as though well used to these
familiarities, continued, wholly undisturbed, to throw out continued
supplies of grain; but, half turning her head till its perfect outline
alone was visible, she gently raised her head, and smilingly offered her
small rosy lips to meet those of her fond, caressing friend. The last
rays of the setting sun shed a pale golden light over this innocent
picture.

While the Goualeuse was thus occupied with her rural cares, Madame
Georges and the Abbé Laporte, curé of Bouqueval, sitting by the fireside
in the neat little parlour of the farm, were conversing on the one
constant theme,--Fleur-de-Marie. The old curé, with a pensive,
thoughtful air, his head bent downwards, and his elbows leaning on his
knees, mechanically stretched his two trembling hands before the fire.
Madame Georges, laying aside the needlework on which she had been
occupied, kept an anxious eye on the abbé, as though eagerly waiting for
some observation from him. After a moment's silence:

"Yes," said he, "you are right, Madame Georges; it will be better for M.
Rodolph to question Marie, for she is so filled with deep gratitude and
devotion to him, that she will probably reveal to him what she persists
in concealing from us."

"Then, since you agree with me, M. le Curé, I will write, this very
evening, to the address he left with me,--the Allée des Veuves."

"Poor child," sighed the kind old man, "she ought to have been so happy
here! What secret grief can thus be preying on her mind?"

[Illustration: "_At Length Alighted on Her Shoulder_"
Original Etching by L. Poiteau]

"Her unhappiness is too deeply fixed to be removed even by her earnest
and passionate application to study."

"And yet she has made a most rapid and extraordinary progress since she
has been under our care, has she not?"

"She has, indeed; already she can read and write with the utmost
fluency, and is already sufficiently advanced in arithmetic to assist me
in keeping my farm accounts; and then the dear child is so active and
industrious, and really affords me so much assistance as both surprises
me and moves me to tears. You know that, spite of my repeated
remonstrances, she persisted in working so hard, that I became quite
alarmed lest such toil should seriously affect her health."

"I am thankful to hear from you," resumed the worthy curé, "that your
negro doctor has fully quieted your apprehensions respecting the cough
your young friend suffered from; he says it is merely temporary, and
gives no reason for uneasiness."

"Oh, that kind, excellent M. David! He really appeared to feel the same
interest in the poor girl that we did who know her sad story. She is
universally beloved and respected by all on the farm; though that is not
surprising, as, thanks to the generous and elevated views of M. Rodolph,
all the persons employed on it are selected for their good sense and
excellent conduct, from all parts of the kingdom; but were it not
so,--were they of the common herd of vulgar-minded labourers, they could
not help feeling the influence of Marie's angelic sweetness, and timid,
graceful manner, as though she were always deprecating anger, or
beseeching pardon for some involuntary fault. Unfortunate being! as
though she alone were to blame."

After remaining for several minutes buried in reflection, the abbé
resumed:

"Did you not tell me that this deep dejection of Marie's might be dated
from the time when Madame Dubreuil, who rents under the Duke de
Lucenay, paid her a visit during the feast of the Holy Ghost?"

"Yes, M. le Curé, I did. And yet Madame Dubreuil and her daughter Clara
(a perfect model of candour and goodness) were as much taken with our
dear child as every one else who approaches her; and both of them
lavished on her every mark of the most affectionate regard. You know
that we pass the Sunday alternately at each other's house; but it
invariably happens that, when we return from our Sunday excursion to
Arnouville, where Madame Dubreuil and her daughter reside, the
melancholy of my dear Marie seems augmented, and her spirits more
depressed than ever. I cannot comprehend why this should be, when Madame
Dubreuil treats her like a second daughter, and the sweet Clara loves
her with the tender affection of a sister."

"In truth, Madame Georges, it is a fearful mystery; what can occasion
all this hidden sorrow, when here she need not have a single care? The
difference between her present and past life must be as great as that
which exists between heaven and the abode of the damned. Surely, hers is
not an ungrateful disposition?"

"She ungrateful! Oh, no, M. le Curé! her sensitive and affectionate
nature magnifies the slightest service rendered her, and she appears as
though her gratitude could never be sufficiently evinced. There is, too,
in her every thought an instinctive delicacy and fineness of feeling
wholly incompatible with ingratitude, which could never be harboured in
so noble a nature as that of my charge. Dear Marie, how anxious does she
seem to earn the bread she eats, and how eagerly she strives to
compensate the hospitality shown her, by every exertion she can make, or
service she can render! And, then, except on Sunday, when I make it a
point she should dress herself with more regard to appearance to
accompany me to church, she will only wear the coarse, humble garments
worn by our young peasant girls; and yet there is in her such an air of
native superiority, so natural a grace, that one would not desire to see
her otherwise attired, would they, M. le Curé?"

"Ah, mother's pride! Beware!" said the old priest, smiling.

At these words, tears filled the eyes of Madame Georges; she thought of
her long-lost child, and of his possible destiny.

"Come, come, dear friend, cheer up! Look upon our dear Marie as sent by
a gracious Providence to occupy your maternal affections until the
blessed moment when he shall restore you your son; and, besides, you
have a sacred duty to perform towards this child of your adoption. Are
you not her baptismal godmother? And, believe me, when that office is
worthily discharged, it almost equals that of a mother. As for M.
Rodolph, he has discharged his obligation of godfather by anticipation,
for, in snatching her from the abyss of crime into which her misfortunes
and her helplessness had cast her, he may be said to have caused her
immortal existence to begin."

"Doubtless the poor thing has never received the sacrament of our holy
church. Do you think, M. le Curé, she is now sufficiently acquainted
with its sanctified purposes to be admitted to a participation of it?"

"I will take an opportunity of learning her sentiments on the subject as
we walk back to the rectory. I shall then apprise her that the holy
ceremony will take place probably in about a fortnight from hence."

"How gratefully she will receive such an information; her religious
feelings are the strongest I have ever met with."

"Alas, poor thing! she has deep and heavy expiation to make for the
errors of her past life."

"Nay, M. l'Abbé, consider. Abandoned so young, without resource, without
friends, almost without a knowledge of good or evil, plunged
involuntarily into the very vortex of crime, what was there to prevent
her from falling the bitter sacrifice she has been?"

"The clear, moral sense of right and wrong implanted by the Creator in
every breast should have withheld her; and, besides, we have no evidence
of her having even sought to escape from the horrible fate into which
she had fallen. Is there no friendly hand to be found in Paris to listen
to the cries of suffering virtue? Is charity so rare, so hard to obtain
in that large city?"

"Let us hope not, M. l'Abbé; but how to discover it is the difficulty.
Ere arriving at the knowledge of one kind, commiserating Christian,
think of the refusals, the rebukes, the denials to be endured. And,
then, in such a case as our poor Marie's, it was no passing temporary
aid that could avail her, but the steady, continued patronage and
support, the being placed in the way to earn an honest livelihood. Many
tender and pitying mothers would have succoured her had they known her
sad case, I doubt not, but it was first requisite to secure the
happiness of knowing where to meet with them. Trust me, I, too, have
known want and misery. But for one of those providential chances which,
alas! too late, threw poor Marie in the way of M. Rodolph,--but for one
of those casualties, the wretched and destitute, most commonly repulsed
with rude denial on their first applications, believe pity irretrievably
lost, and, pressed by hunger, fierce, clamorous hunger, often seek in
vice that relief they despair to obtain from commiseration."

At this moment the Goualeuse entered the parlour.

"Where have you been, my dear child?" inquired Madame Georges,
anxiously.

"Visiting the fruit-house, madame, after having shut up the hen-houses
and gates of the poultry-yard. All the fruit has kept excellently,--all
but those I ran away with and ate."

"Now, Marie, why take all this fatigue upon yourself? You should have
left all this tiring work to Claudine; I fear you have quite tired
yourself."

"No, no! dear Madame Georges; I wouldn't let Claudine help me for the
world. I take so much delight in my fruit-house,--the smell of the
beautiful ripe fruit is so delicious."

"M. le Curé," said Madame Georges, "you must go some day and see Marie's
fruit-house. You can scarcely imagine the taste with which she has
arranged it; each different variety of fruit is separated by rows of
grapes, and the grapes are again divided off by strips of moss."

"Oh, yes, M. le Curé; pray do come and see it," said the Goualeuse,
innocently; "I am sure you would be pleased with it. You would be
surprised what a pretty contrast the moss makes to the bright rosy
apples or the rich golden pears. There are some such lovely waxen
apples, quite a pure red and white; and really, as they lie surrounded
by the soft green moss, I cannot help thinking of the heads of little
cherubim just peeping out from the glorious clouds of heaven," added the
delighted Goualeuse, speaking with all the enthusiasm of an artist of
the work of her creation.

The curé looked at Madame Georges, then smilingly replied to
Fleur-de-Marie:

"I have already admired the dairy over which you preside, my child, and
can venture to declare it perfect in its way; the most particular
dairy-woman might envy you the perfection to which you have brought it.
Ere long, I promise myself the pleasure of visiting your fruit-house,
and passing a similar compliment on your skill in arrangement. You shall
then introduce me to those charming rosy apples and delicious golden
pears, as well as to the little cherubim pippins so prettily peeping
from their mossy beds. But see! the sun has already set; you will
scarcely have sufficient time to conduct me back to the rectory-house
and return before dark. Come, my child, fetch your cloak, and let us be
gone; or, now I think of it, do you remain at home this cold bitter
night, and let one of the farm servants go home with me."

"Oh, M. le Curé," replied the kind Madame Georges, "Marie will be quite
wretched if she is not allowed to accompany you; she so much enjoys the
happiness of escorting you home every evening."

"Indeed, Monsieur le Curé," added the Goualeuse, timidly raising her
large blue eyes to the priest's countenance, "I shall fear you are
displeased with me if you do not permit me to accompany you as usual."

"Well, then, my dear child, wrap yourself up very warm, and let us go."

Fleur-de-Marie hastily threw over her shoulders a sort of cloak of
coarse white cloth, edged with black velvet, and with a large hood, to
be drawn at pleasure over the head. Thus equipped, she eagerly offered
her arm to her venerable friend.

"Happily," said he, in taking it, "the distance is but trifling, and the
road both good and safe to pass at all hours."

"As it is somewhat later to-night than usual," said Madame Georges,
"will you have one of the farm-people to return with you, Marie?"

"Do you take me for a coward?" said Marie, playfully. "I am very much
obliged to you for your good opinion, madame. No, pray do not let any
one be called away on my account. It is not a quarter of an hour's walk
from here to the rectory. I shall be back long before dark."

"Well, as you like. I merely thought it would be company for you; for as
to fearing, thank heaven, there is no cause. Loose vagabond people,
likely to interrupt your progress, are wholly unknown here."

"And, were I not equally sure of the absence of all danger, I would not
accept this dear child's arm," added the curé, "useful as, I confess, I
find it."

And, leaning on Fleur-de-Marie, who regulated her light step to suit the
slow and laboured pace of the old man, the two friends quitted the farm.

A few minutes' walk brought the Goualeuse and the priest close to the
hollow road in which the Schoolmaster, the Chouette, and Tortillard,
were lying in ambush.




CHAPTER IV.

THE AMBUSCADE.


The church and parsonage of Bouqueval were placed on the side of a hill
covered with chestnut-trees, and commanded an entire view of the
village. Fleur-de-Marie and the abbé reached a winding path which led to
the clergyman's home, crossing the sunken road by which the hill was
intersected diagonally. The Chouette, the Schoolmaster, and Tortillard,
concealed in one of the hollows of the road, saw the priest and
Fleur-de-Marie descend into the ravine, and leave it again by a steep
declivity. The features of the young girl being hidden under the hood of
her cloak, the Chouette did not recognise her old victim.

"Silence, my old boy," said the old harridan to the Schoolmaster; "the
young 'mot' and the 'black slug' are just crossing the path. I know her
by the description which the tall man in black gave us; a country
appearance, neither tall nor short; a petticoat shot with brown, and a
woollen mantle with a black border. She walks every day with a
'devil-dodger' to his 'crib,' and returns alone. When she come back,
which she will do presently by the end of the road, we must spring upon
her and carry her off to the coach."

"If she cries for help," replied the Schoolmaster, "they will hear her
at the farm, if, as you say, the out-buildings are visible from here;
for you--you can see," he added, in a sullen tone.

"Oh, yes, we can see the buildings from here quite plainly," said
Tortillard. "It is only a minute ago that I climbed to the top of the
bank, and, lying down on my belly, I could hear a carter who was talking
to his horses in the yard there."

"I'll tell you, then, what we must do," said the Schoolmaster, after a
moment's silence. "Let Tortillard have the watch at the entrance to the
path. When he sees the young girl returning, let him go and meet her,
saying that he is the son of a poor old woman who has hurt herself by
falling down the hollow road, and beg the girl to come to her
assistance."

"I'm up to you, _fourline_; the poor old woman is your darling Chouette.
You're 'wide-awake!' My man, you are always the king of the 'downy ones'
(_têtards_). What must I do afterwards?"

"Conceal yourself in the hollow way on the side where Barbillon is
waiting with the coach. I will be at hand. When Tortillard has brought
the wench to you in the middle of the ravine, leave off whimpering and
spring upon her, put one 'mauley' round her 'squeeze,' and the other
into her 'patter-box,' and 'grab' her 'red rag' to prevent her from
squeaking."

"I know, I know, _fourline_; as we did with the woman at the canal of
St. Martin, when we gave her cold water for supper (drowned her), after
having 'prigged' her 'negress' (the parcel wrapped in black oil-skin)
which she had under her arm,--the same 'dodge,' isn't it?"

"Yes, precisely. But mind, grab the girl tight whilst Tortillard comes
and fetches me. We three will then bundle her up in my cloak, carry her
to Barbillon's coach, from thence to the plain of St. Denis, where the
man in black will await us."

"That's the way to do business, my _fourline_; you are without an equal!
If I could, I would let off a firework on your head, and illuminate you
with the colours of Saint Charlot, the patron of 'scragsmen.' Do you
see, you urchin? If you would be an 'out-and-outer,' make my husband
your model," said the Chouette, boastingly to Tortillard. Then,
addressing the Schoolmaster, "By the way, do you know that Barbillon is
in an awful 'funk' (fright)? He thinks that he shall be had up before
the 'beaks' on a swinging matter."

"Why?"

"The other day, returning from Mother Martial's, the widow of the man
who was scragged, and who keeps the boozing-ken in the Ile du Ravageur,
Barbillon, the Gros-Boiteux, and the Skeleton had a row with the husband
of the milkwoman who comes every morning from the country in a little
cart drawn by a donkey, to sell her milk in the Cité, at the corner of
the Rue de la Vieille-Draperie, close to the ogress's of the 'White
Rabbit,' and they 'walked into him with their slashers' (killed him with
their knives)."

The son of Bras Rouge, who did not understand slang, listened to the
Chouette with a sort of disappointed curiosity.

"You would like to know, little man, what we are saying, wouldn't you?"

"Yes. You were talking of Mother Martial, who is at the Ile du Ravageur,
near Asnières. I know her very well, and her daughter Calebasse and
François and Amandine, who are about as old as I am, and who are made to
bear everybody's snubs and thumps in the house. But when you talked of
'walking into (_buter_) any one,' that's slang, I know."

"It is; and, if you're a very good chap, I'll teach you to 'patter
flash.' You're just the age when it may be very useful to you. Would you
like to learn, my precious lambkin?"

"I rather think I should, too, and no mistake; and I would rather live
with you than with my old cheat of a mountebank, pounding his drugs. If
I knew where he hides his 'rat-poison for men,' I'd put some in his
soup, and then that would settle the quarrel between us."

The Chouette laughed heartily, and said to Tortillard, drawing him
towards her:

"Come, chick, and kiss his mammy. What a droll boy it is--a darling!
But, my manikin, how didst know that he had 'rat-poison for men'?"

"Why, 'cause I heard him say so one day when I was hid in the cupboard
in the room where he keeps his bottles, his brass machines, and where he
mixes his stuffs together."

"What did you hear him say?" asked the Chouette.

"I heard him say to a gentleman that he gave a powder to, in a paper,
'When you are tired of life, take this in three doses, and you will
sleep without sickness or sorrow.'"

"Who was the gentleman?" asked the Schoolmaster.

"Oh, a very handsome gentleman with black moustachios, and a face as
pretty as a girl's. He came another time; and then, when he left, I
followed him, by M. Bradamanti's order, to find out where he perched.
The fine gentleman went into the Rue de Chaillot, and entered a very
grand house. My master said to me, 'No matter where this gentleman goes,
follow and wait for him at the door. If he comes out again, still keep
your eye on him, until he does not come out of the place where he
enters, and that will prove that he lives there. Then Tortillard, my
boy, twist (_tortille_) yourself about to find out his name, or I will
twist your ears in a way that will astonish you.'"

"Well?"

"Well, I did twist myself about, and found out his name."

"How did you manage it?" inquired the Schoolmaster.

"Why, so. I'm not a fool; so I went to the porter at the house in the
Rue de Chaillot, where this gentleman had gone in and not come out
again. The porter had his hair finely powdered, with a fine brown coat
with a yellow collar trimmed with silver. So I says to him, 'Good
gentleman, I have come to ask for a hundred sous which the gentleman of
the house has promised me for having found his dog and brought it back
to him--a little black dog called Trumpet; and the gentleman with dark
features, with black moustachios, a white riding-coat, and light blue
pantaloons, told me he lived at No. 11 Rue de Chaillot, and that his
name was Dupont.' 'The gentleman you're talking of is my master, and his
name is the Viscount de St. Remy, and we have no dog here but yourself,
you young scamp; so "cut your stick," or I'll make you remember coming
here, and trying to do me out of a hundred sous,' says the porter to me;
and he gave me a kick as he said it. But I didn't mind that," added
Tortillard most philosophically, "for I found out the name of the
handsome young gentleman with black moustachios, who came to my master's
to buy the 'rat-poison for men' who are tired of living. He is called
the Viscount de St. Remy,--my--my--St. Remy," added the son of Bras
Rouge, humming the last words, as was his usual habit.

"Clever little darling--I could eat him up alive!" said the Chouette,
embracing Tortillard. "Never was such a knowing fellow. He deserves that
I should be his mother, the dear rascal does."

And the hag embraced Tortillard with an absurd affectation. The son of
Bras Rouge, touched by this proof of affection, and desirous of showing
his gratitude, eagerly answered:

"Only you tell me what to do, and you shall see how I'll do it."

"Will you, though? Well, then, you sha'n't repent doing so."

"Oh, I should like always to stay with you!"

"If you behave well, we may see about that. You sha'n't leave us if you
are a good boy."

"Yes," said the Schoolmaster, "you shall lead me about like a poor blind
man, and say you are my son. We will get into houses in this way, and
then--ten thousand slaughters!" added the assassin with enthusiasm; "the
Chouette will assist us in making lucky hits. I will then teach that
devil of a Rodolph, who blinded me, that I am not yet quite done for. He
took away my eyesight, but he could not, did not remove my bent for
mischief. I would be the head, Tortillard the eyes, and you the
hand,--eh, Chouette? You will help me in this, won't you?"

"Am I not with you to gallows and rope, _fourline_? Didn't I, when I
left the hospital, and learnt that you had sent the 'yokel' from St.
Mandé to ask for me at the ogress's--didn't I run to you at the village
directly, telling those chawbacons of labourers that I was your _rib_?"

These words of the "one-eyed's" reminded the Schoolmaster of an
unpleasant affair, and, altering his tone and language with the
Chouette, he said, in a surly tone:

"Yes, I was getting tired of being all by myself with these honest
people. After a month I could not stand it any longer; I was frightened.
So then I thought of trying to find you out; and a nice thing I did for
myself," he added, in a tone of increasing anger; "for the day after you
arrived I was robbed of the rest of the money which that devil in the
Allée des Veuves had given me. Yes, some one stole my belt full of gold
whilst I was asleep. It was only you who could have done it; and so now
I am at your mercy. Whenever I think of it, I can hardly restrain myself
from killing you on the spot--you cursed old robber, you!" and he
stepped towards the old woman.

"Look out for yourself, if you try to do any harm to the Chouette!"
cried Tortillard.

"I will smash you both--you and she--base vipers as you are!" cried the
ruffian, enraged; and, hearing the boy mumbling near him, he aimed at
him so violent a blow with his fist, as must have killed him if it had
struck him. Tortillard, as much to revenge himself as the Chouette,
picked up a stone, took aim, and struck the Schoolmaster on the
forehead. The blow was not dangerous, but very painful. The brigand grew
furious with passion, raging like a wounded bull, and, rushing forward
swiftly and at random, stumbled.

"What, break your own back?" shouted the Chouette, laughing till she
cried.

Despite the bloody ties which bound her to this monster, she saw how
entirely, and with a sort of savage delight, this man, formerly so
dreaded, and so proud of his giant strength, was reduced to impotence.
The old wretch, by these feelings, justified that cold-blooded idea of
La Rochefoucauld's, that "there is something in the misfortunes of our
best friends which does not displease us." The disgusting brat, with his
tawny cheeks and weasel face, enjoyed and participated in the mirth of
the one-eyed hag. The Schoolmaster tripped again, and the urchin
exclaimed:

"Open your peepers, old fellow; look about you. You are going the wrong
way. What capers you are cutting! Can't you see your way? Why don't you
wipe your eye-glasses?"

Unable to seize on the boy, the athletic murderer stopped, struck his
foot violently on the ground, put his enormous and hairy fists to his
eyes, and then uttered a sound which resembled the hoarse scream of a
muzzled tiger.

"Got a bad cough, I'm afraid, old chap!" said Bras Rouge's brat. "You're
hoarse, I'm afraid? I have some capital liquorice which a _gen-d'arme_
gave me. P'raps you'd like to try it?" and, taking up a handful of sand,
he threw it in the face of the ruffian.

Struck full in his countenance by this shower of gravel, the
Schoolmaster suffered still more severely by this last attack than by
the blow from the stone. Become pale, in spite of his livid and
cicatrised features, he extended his two arms suddenly in the form of a
cross, in a moment of inexpressible agony and despair, and, raising his
frightful face to heaven, he cried, in a voice of deep suffering:

"_Mon Dieu! Mon Dieu! Mon Dieu!_"

This involuntary appeal to divine mercy by a man stained by every crime,
a bandit in whose presence but very recently the most resolute of his
fellows trembled, appeared like an interposition of Providence.

"Ha! ha! ha!" said the Chouette, in a mocking tone; "look at the thief
making the crucifix! You mistake your road, my man. It is the 'old one'
you should call to your help."

"A knife! Oh, for a knife to kill myself! A knife! since all the world
abandons me!" shrieked the wretch, gnawing his fists for very agony and
rage.

"A knife!--there's one in your pocket, cut-throat, and with an edge,
too. The little old man in the Rue du Roule, you know, one moonlight
night, and the cattle-dealer in the Poissy road, could tell the 'moles'
all about it. But if you want it, it's here."

The Schoolmaster, when thus instructed, changed the conversation, and
replied, in a surly and threatening tone:

"The Chourineur was true; he did not rob, but had pity on me."

"Why did you say that I had 'prigged your blunt'?" inquired the
Chouette, hardly able to restrain her laughter.

"It was only you who came into my room," said the miscreant. "I was
robbed on the night of your arrival, and who else could I suspect? Those
country people could not have done such a thing."

"Why should not country people steal as well as other folks? Is it
because they drink milk and gather grass for their rabbits?"

"I don't know. I only know I'm robbed."

"And is that the fault of your own Chouette? What! suspect me? Do you
think if I had got your belt that I should stay any longer with you.
What a fool you are! Why, if I had chosen to 'pouch your blunt,' I
could, of course; but, as true as I'm Chouette, you would have seen me
again when the 'pewter' was spent, for I like you as well now with your
eyes white, as I did--you rogue, you! Come, be decent, and leave off
grinding your 'snags' in that way, or you'll break 'em."

"It's just as if he was a-cracking nuts," said Tortillard.

"Ha! ha! ha! what a droll baby it is! But quiet, now, quiet, my man of
men; let him laugh, it is but an infant. You must own you have been
unfair; for when the tall man in mourning, who looks like a mute at a
funeral, said to me, 'A thousand francs are yours if you carry off this
young girl from the farm at Bouqueval, and bring her to the spot in the
Plain of St. Denis that I shall tell you,' say, cut-throat, didn't I
directly tell you of the affair and agree to share with you, instead of
choosing some 'pal' with his eyesight clear? Why, it's like making you a
handsome present for doing nothing; for unless to bundle up the girl and
carry her, with Tortillard's assistance, you would be of no more use to
me than the fifth wheel to an omnibus. But never mind; for, although I
could have robbed you if I would, I like, on the contrary, to do you
service. I should wish you to owe everything to your darling
Chouette--that's my way, that is. We must give two hundred 'bob' to
Barbillon for driving the coach, and coming once before with the servant
of the tall man in mourning, to look about the place and determine where
we should hide ourselves whilst we waited for the young miss; and then
we shall have eight hundred 'bob' between us. What do you say to that
old boy? What! still angry with your old woman?"

"How do I know that you will give me a 'mag' when once the thing's done?
Why!--I"--said the ruffian, in a tone of gloomy distrust.

"Why, if I like, I need not give you a dump, that's true enough; for you
are on my gridiron, my lad, as I once had the Goualeuse; and so I will
broil you to my own taste, till the 'old one' gets the cooking of my
darling--ha! ha! ha! What, still sulky with your Chouette?" added the
horrible woman, patting the shoulder of the ruffian, who stood mute and
motionless.

"You are right," said he, with a sigh of concentrated rage; "it is my
fate--mine--mine! At the mercy of a woman and child whom but lately I
could have killed with a blow. Oh, if I were not afraid of dying!" said
he, falling back against the bank.

"What! a coward!--you--you a coward!" said the Chouette, contemptuously.
"Why, you'll be talking next of your conscience! What a precious farce!
Well, if you haven't more pluck than that, I'll 'cut' and leave you."

"And that I cannot have my revenge of the man who in thus making a
martyr of me has reduced me to the wretched situation in which I am!"
screamed the Schoolmaster, in a renewal of fury. "I am afraid of
death--yes, I own it, I am afraid. But if I were told, 'This man Rodolph
is between your arms--your two arms--and now you shall both be flung
into a pit,' I would say, 'Throw us, then, at once.' Yes, for then I
should be safe not to relax my clutch, till we both reached the bottom
together. I would fix my teeth in his face--his throat--his heart. I
would tear him to pieces with my teeth--yes, my teeth; for I should be
jealous of a knife!"

"Bravo, _fourline_! now you are my own dear love again. Calm yourself.
We will find him again, that wretch of a Rodolph, and the Chourineur
too. Come, pluck up, old man; we will yet work our will on them both. I
say it, on both!"

"Well, then, you will not forsake me?" cried the brigand to the Chouette
in a subdued tone, mingled, however, with distrust. "If you do leave me,
what will become of me?"

"That's true. I say, _fourline_, what a joke if Tortillard and I were to
'mizzle' with the 'drag,' and leave you where you are--in the middle of
the fields; and the night air begins to nip very sharp. I say, it would
be a joke, old cutpurse, wouldn't it?"

At this threat the Schoolmaster shuddered, and, coming towards the
Chouette, said tremulously, "No, no, you wouldn't do that, Chouette; nor
you, Tortillard. It would be too bad, wouldn't it?"

"Ha! ha! ha! 'Too bad,' says he, the gentle dear! And the little old man
in the Rue du Roule; and the cattle-dealer and the woman in Saint
Martin's Canal; and the gentleman in the Allée des Veuves; they found
you nice and amiable, I don't think--didn't they--with your
'larding-pin?' Why, then, in your turn, shouldn't you be left to such
tender mercy as you have showed?"

"I'm in your power, don't abuse it," said the Schoolmaster. "Come, come,
I confess I was wrong to suspect you. I was wrong to try and thump
Tortillard; and, you see, I beg pardon; and of you too, Tortillard. Yes,
I ask pardon of both."

"I will have you ask pardon on your knees for having tried to beat the
Chouette," said Tortillard.

"You rum little beggar, how funny you are!" said the Chouette, laughing
loudly; "but I should like to see what a 'guy' you will make of
yourself. So on your knees, as if you were 'pattering' love to your old
darling. Come, do it directly, or we will leave you; and I tell you that
in half an hour it will be quite dark, though you don't look as if you
thought so, old 'No-Eyes.'"

"Night or day, what's that to him?" said Tortillard, saucily. "The
gentleman always has his shutters closed."

"Then here, on my knees, I humbly ask your pardon, Chouette; and yours
also, Tortillard! Will not that content you?" said the robber, kneeling
in the middle of the highway. "And now will you leave me?"

This strange group, enclosed by the embankment of the ravine, and
lighted by the red glimmer of the twilight, was hideous to behold. In
the middle of the road the Schoolmaster, on his knees, extended his
large and coarse hands towards the one-eyed hag; his thick and matted
hair, which his fright had dishevelled, left exposed his motionless,
rigid, glassy, dead eyeballs--the very glance of a corpse. Stooping
deprecatingly his broad-spread shoulders, this Hercules kneels abjectly,
and trembles at the feet of an old woman and a child!

The old hag herself, wrapped in a red-checked shawl, her head covered
with an old cap of black lace, which allowed some locks of her grizzled
hair to escape, looked down with an air of haughty contempt and
domineering pride on the Schoolmaster. The bony, scorched, shrivelled,
and livid countenance of the parrot-nosed old harridan expressed a
savage and insulting joy; her small but fierce eye glistened like a
burning coal; a sinister expression curled her lips, shaded with long
straight hairs, and revealed three or four large, yellow, and decayed
fangs.

Tortillard, clothed in a blouse with a leathern belt, standing on one
leg, leaned on the Chouette's arm to keep himself upright. The bad
expression and cunning look of this deformed imp, with a complexion as
sallow as his hair, betokened at this moment his disposition--half
fiend, half monkey. The shadow cast from the declivity of the ravine
increased the horrid _tout ensemble_ of the scene, which the increasing
darkness half hid.

"Promise me,--oh, promise me--at least, not to forsake me!" repeated
the Schoolmaster, frightened by the silence of the Chouette and
Tortillard, who were enjoying his dismay. "Are you not here?" added the
murderer, leaning forward to listen, and advancing his arms
mechanically.

"Yes, my man, we are here; don't be frightened. Forsake you! leave my
love! the man of my heart! No, I'd sooner be 'scragged'! Once for all, I
will tell you why I will not forsake you. Listen, and profit. I have
always liked to have some one in my grip--beast or Christian. Before I
had Pegriotte (oh! that the 'old one' would return her to my clutch! for
I have still my idea of scaling off her beauty with my bottle of
vitriol)--before Pegriotte's turn, I had a brat who froze to death under
my care. For that little job, I got six years in the 'Stone Jug.' Then I
used to have little birds, which I used to tame, and then pluck 'em
alive. Ha! ha! but that was troublesome work, for they did not last
long. When I left the 'Jug,' the Goualeuse came to hand; but the little
brat ran away before I had had half my fun out of her carcass. Well,
then I had a dog, who had his little troubles as well as she had; and I
cut off one of his hind feet and one of his four feet; and you never saw
such a rum beggar as I made of him; I almost burst my sides with
laughing at him!"

"I must serve a dog I know of, who bit me one day, in the same way,"
said the promising Master Tortillard.

"When I fell in again with you, my darling," continued the Chouette, "I
was trying what I could do that was miserable with a cat. Well, now, at
this moment, you, old boy, shall be my cat, my dog, my bird, my
Pegriotte; you shall be anything to worry (_bête de souffrance_). Do you
understand, my love? Instead of having a bird or a child to make
miserable, I shall have, as it were, a wolf or a tiger. I think that's
rather a bright idea; isn't it?"

"Hag! devil!" cried the Schoolmaster, rising in a desperate rage.

"What, my pet angry with his darling old deary? Well, if it must be so,
it must. Have your own way; you have a right to it. Good night, blind
sheep!"

"The field-gate is wide open, so walk alone, Mister No-eyes; and, if you
toddle straight, you'll reach the right road somehow," said Tortillard,
laughing heartily.

"Oh, that I could die! die! die!" said the Schoolmaster, writhing and
twisting his arms about in agony.

At this moment, Tortillard, stooping to the ground, exclaimed, in a low
voice:

"I hear footsteps in the path; let us hide; it is not the young miss,
for they come the same way as she did."

On the instant, a stout peasant girl in the prime of youth, followed by
a large shepherd's dog, carrying on her head an open basket, appeared,
and followed the same path which the priest and the Goualeuse had taken.
We will rejoin the two latter, leaving the three accomplices concealed
in the hollow of the path.




CHAPTER V.

THE RECTORY-HOUSE.


The last rays of the sun were gradually disappearing behind the vast
pile of the Château d'Ecouen and the woods which surrounded it. On all
sides, until the sight lost them in the distance, were vast tracts of
land lying in brown furrows hardened by the frost--an extensive desert,
of which the hamlet of Bouqueval appeared to be the oasis. The sky,
which was serenely glorious, was tinted by the sunset, and glowed with
long lines of empurpled light, the certain token of wind and cold. These
tints, which were at first of a deep red, became violet; then a bluish
black, as the twilight grew more and more dark on the atmosphere. The
crescent of the moon was as delicately and clearly defined as a silver
ring, and began to shine beautifully in the midst of the blue and dimmed
sky, where many stars already had appeared. The silence was profound;
the hour most solemn. The curate stopped for a moment on the summit of
the acclivity to enjoy the calm of this delicious evening. After some
minutes' reflection, he extended his trembling hand towards the depths
of the horizon, half veiled by the shadows of the evening, and said to
Fleur-de-Marie, who was walking pensively beside him:

"Look, my child, at the vastness and extent to which we have no visible
limit; we hear not the slightest sound. Say, does not this silence give
us an idea of infinity and of eternity? I say this to you, Marie,
because you are peculiarly sensitive of the beauties of creation. I
have often been struck at the admiration, alike poetical and religious,
with which they inspire you,--you, a poor prisoner so long deprived of
them. Are you not, as I am, struck with the solemn tranquillity of the
hour?"

The Goualeuse made no reply. The curé, regarding her with astonishment,
found she was weeping.

"What ails you, my child?"

"My father, I am unhappy!"

"Unhappy!--you?--still unhappy!"

"I know it is ingratitude to complain of my lot after all that has been
and is done for me; and yet--"

"And yet?"

"Father, I pray of you forgive my sorrows; their expression may offend
my benefactors."

"Listen, Marie. We have often asked you the cause of these sorrows with
which you are depressed, and which excite in your second mother the most
serious uneasiness. You have avoided all reply, and we have respected
your secret whilst we have been afflicted at not being able to solace
your sorrows."

"Alas; good father, I dare not tell you what is passing in my mind. I
have been moved, as you have been, at the sight of this calm and
saddening evening. My heart is sorely afflicted, and I have wept."

"But what ails you, Marie? You know how we love you! Come, tell me all.
You should; for I must tell you that the time is very close at hand when
Madame Georges and M. Rodolph will present you at the baptismal font,
and take upon themselves the engagement before God to protect you all
the days of your life."

"M. Rodolph--he who has saved me?" cried Fleur-de-Marie, clasping her
hands; "he will deign to give me this new proof of affection! Oh,
indeed, my father, I can no longer conceal from you anything, lest I
should, indeed, deserve to be called and thought an ingrate."

"An ingrate! How?"

"That you may understand me, I must begin and tell you of my first day
at the farm."

"Then let us talk as we walk on."

"You will be indulgent to me, my father? What I shall say may perhaps be
wrong."

"The Lord has shown his mercy unto you. Be of good heart."

"When," said Fleur-de-Marie, after a moment's reflection, "I knew that,
on arriving here, I should not again leave the farm and Madame Georges,
I believed it was all a dream. At first I felt giddy with my happiness,
and thought every moment of M. Rodolph. Very often when I was alone, and
in spite of myself, I raised my eyes to heaven, as if to seek him there
and thank him. Afterwards--and I was wrong, father--I thought more of
him than God, attributing to him what God alone could do. I was
happy--as happy as a creature who had suddenly and entirely escaped from
a great danger. You and Madame Georges were so kind to me, that I
thought I deserved pity rather than blame."

The curé looked at the Goualeuse with an air of surprise. She continued:

"Gradually I became used to my sweet course of life. I no longer felt
fear when I awoke, of finding myself at the ogress's. I seemed to sleep
in full security, and all my delight was to assist Madame Georges in her
work, and to apply myself to the lesson you gave me, my father, as well
as to profit by your advice and exhortation. Except some moments of
shame, when I reflected on the past, I thought myself equal to all the
world, because all the world was so kind to me. When, one day--"

Here sobs cut short poor Fleur-de-Marie's narration.

"Come, come, my poor child, calm yourself. Courage, courage!"

The Goualeuse wiped her eyes, and resumed:

"You recollect, father, during the fêtes of the Toussaints, that Madame
Dubreuil, who superintends the Duke de Lucenay's farm at Arnouville,
came, with her daughter, to pass some time with us?"

"I do; and I was delighted to see you form an acquaintance with Clara
Dubreuil, who is a very excellent girl."

"She is an angel--an angel, father. When I knew that she was coming to
stay for some days at the farm, my delight was so great that I could
think of nothing else but the moment when she should arrive. At length
she came. I was in my room, which she was to share with me; and, whilst
I was putting it into nice order I was sent for. I went into the saloon,
my heart beating excessively, when Madame Georges, presenting me to the
pretty young lady, whose looks were so kind and good, said, 'Marie, here
is a friend for you.' 'I hope,' added Madame Dubreuil, 'that you and my
daughter will soon be like two sisters;' and hardly had her mother
uttered these words, than Mademoiselle Clara came and embraced me. Then,
father," continued Fleur-de-Marie, weeping, "I do not know what came
over me; but, when I felt the fresh and fair face of Clara pressed
against my cheek of shame, that cheek became scorching with
guilt--remorse. I remembered who and what I was;--I--I--to receive the
caresses of a good and virtuous girl!"

"Why, my child?"

"Ah, my father," cried Fleur-de-Marie, interrupting the curé with
painful emotion, "when M. Rodolph took me away from the Cité, I began
vaguely to be conscious of the depth of my degradation. But do you think
that education, advice, the examples I receive from Madame Georges and
yourself, have not, whilst they have enlightened my mind, made me, alas!
to comprehend but too clearly that I have been more culpable than
unfortunate? Before Clara's arrival, when these thoughts grew upon me,
I drove them away by seeking to please Madame Georges and you, father.
If I blushed for the past it was only in my own presence. But the sight
of this young lady of my own age, so charming, so virtuous, has conjured
up the recollection of the distance that exists between us; and, for the
first time, I have felt that there are wrongs which nothing can efface.
From that time the thought has haunted me perpetually, and, in spite of
myself, I recur to it. From that day I have not had one moment's
repose." The Goualeuse again wiped her eyes, that swam in tears.

After having looked at her for some moments with a gaze of the tenderest
pity, the curé replied:

"Reflect, my child, that if Madame Georges desired to see you the friend
of Mademoiselle Dubreuil, it was that she felt you were worthy of such a
confidence from your good conduct. Your reproaches, addressed to
yourself, seem almost to impugn your second mother."

"I feel that, father, and was wrong, no doubt; but I could not subdue my
shame and fear. When Clara was once settled at the farm, I was as sad as
I had before thought I should be happy, when I reflected on the pleasure
of having a companion of my own age. She, on the contrary, was all joy
and lightness. She had a bed in my apartment; and the first evening
before she went to bed she kissed me, saying that she loved me already,
and felt every kind sentiment towards me. She made me to call her Clara,
and she would call me Marie. Then she said her prayers, telling me that
she would join my name with hers in her prayers, if I would also unite
her name with mine. I did not dare to refuse; and, after talking for
some time, she went to sleep. I had not got into my bed, and,
approaching her bedside, I contemplated her angel face with tears in my
eyes; and then, reflecting that she was sleeping in the same chamber
with me--with one who had been at the ogress's, mixed up with robbers
and murderers, I trembled as if I had committed some crime, and a
thousand nameless fears beset me. I thought that God would one day
punish me. I went to sleep and had horrid dreams. I saw again those
frightful objects I had nearly forgotten--the Chourineur, the
Schoolmaster, the Chouette--that horrible, one-eyed woman who had
tortured my earliest infancy. Oh, what a night! _Mon Dieu!_--what a
night! What dreams!" said the Goualeuse, shuddering at their very
recollection.

"Poor Marie!" said the curé with emotion. "Why did you not earlier tell
me all this? I should have found comfort for you. But go on."

"I slept so late, that Mademoiselle Clara awoke me by kissing me. To
overcome what she called my coldness, and show her regard, she told me a
secret--that she was going to be married when she was eighteen to the
son of a farmer at Goussainville, whom she loved very dearly, and the
union had long been agreed upon by the two families. Then she added a
few words of her past life, so simple, calm, and happy! She had never
quitted her mother, and never intended to do so, for her husband was to
take part in the management of the farm with M. Dubreuil. 'Now, Marie,'
she said, 'you know me as well as if you were my sister. So tell me all
about your early days.'

"I thought when I heard the words that I should have died of them; I
blushed and stammered; I did not know what Madame Georges had said of
me, and I was fearful of telling a falsehood; I answered vaguely, that I
had been an orphan, educated by a very rigid person; and that I had not
been happy in my infancy; and that my happiness was dated from the
moment when I had come to live with Madame Georges; then Clara, as much
by interest as curiosity, asked me where I had been educated, in the
city or the country, my father's name, and, above all, if I remembered
anything of my mother. All these questions embarrassed as much as they
pained me, for I was obliged to reply with falsehood, and you have
taught me, father, how wicked it is to lie; but Clara did not think that
I was deceiving her; she attributed the hesitation of my answers to the
pain which my early sorrows renewed; she believed me and pitied me with
a sincerity that cut me to the soul. Oh, father, you never can know what
I suffered in this conversation, and how much it cost me only to reply
in language of falsehood and hypocrisy!"

"Unfortunate girl! The anger of heaven will weigh heavily on those who,
by casting you into the vile road of perdition, have compelled you to
undergo all your life the sad consequences of a first fault."

"Oh, yes, they were indeed cruel, father," replied Fleur-de-Marie,
bitterly, "for my shame is ineffaceable. As Clara talked to me of the
happiness that awaited her,--her marriage, her peaceful joys of home, I
could not help comparing my lot with hers; for, in spite of the kindness
showered upon me, my fate must always be miserable. You and Madame
Georges, in teaching me what virtue is, have taught me the depth of that
abasement into which I had fallen; nothing can take from me the brand of
having been the refuse of all that is vilest in the world. Alas! if the
knowledge of good and evil was to be so sad to me, why not have
abandoned me to my unhappy fate?"

"Oh, Marie, Marie!"

"Father, I speak ill, do I not? Alas! I dare not confess it; but I am at
times so ungrateful as to repine at the benefits heaped upon me, and to
say to myself, 'If I had not been snatched from infamy, why,
wretchedness, misery, blows, would soon have ended my life; and, at
least, I should have remained in ignorance of that purity which I must
for ever regret.'"

"Alas! Marie, that is indeed fatal! A nature ever so nobly endowed by
the Creator, though plunged but for one day in the foul mire from which
you have been extricated, will preserve for ever the ineffaceable
stigma."

"Yes, yes, my father," cried Fleur-de-Marie, full of grief, "I must
despair until I die!"

"You must despair of ever tearing out this frightful page from the book
of your existence," said the priest, in a sad and serious voice; "but
you must have faith in the infinite mercy of the Almighty. Here, on
earth, my poor child, there are for you tears, remorse, expiation; but,
one day, there,--up there," and he raised his hand to the sky, now
filling with stars, "there is pardon and everlasting happiness."

"Pity, pity, _mon Dieu_! I am so young, and my life may still endure so
long," said the Goualeuse, in a voice rent by agony, and falling at the
curé's knees almost involuntarily.

The priest was standing at the top of the hill, not far from where his
"modest mansion rose;" his black cassock, his venerable countenance,
shaded by long white locks, lighted by the last ray of twilight, stood
out from the horizon, which was of a deep transparency,--a perfect
clearness: pale gold in the west, sapphire over his head. The priest
again elevated towards heaven one of his tremulous hands, and gave the
other to Fleur-de-Marie, who bedewed it with her tears. The hood of her
gray cloak fell at this moment from her shoulders, displaying the
perfect outline of her lovely profile,--her charming features full of
suffering, and suffused with tears.

This simple and sublime scene offered a strange contrast,--a singular
coincidence with the horrid one which, almost at the same moment, was
passing in the ravine between the Schoolmaster and the Chouette.
Concealed in the darkness of the sombre cleft, assailed by base fears, a
fearful murderer, carrying on his person the punishment of his crimes,
was also on his knees, but in the presence of an accessory, a sneering,
revengeful Fury, who tormented him mercilessly, and urged him on to
fresh crimes,--that accomplice, the first cause of Fleur-de-Marie's
misery.

Of Fleur-de-Marie, whose days and nights were embittered by never-dying
remorse; whose anguish, hardly endurable, was not conceivable;
surrounded from her earliest days by degraded, cruel, infamous outcasts
of society; leaving the walls of a prison for the den of the
ogress,--even a more horrid prison; never leaving the precincts of her
gaol, or the squalid streets of the Cité; this unhappy young creature
had hitherto lived in utter ignorance of the beautiful and the good, as
strange to noble and religious sentiments as to the magnificent
splendour of nature. Then all that was admirable in the creature and in
the Creator was revealed in a moment to her astonished soul. At this
striking spectacle her mind expanded, her intelligence unfolded itself,
her noble instincts were awakened; and because her mind expanded,
because her intelligence was unfolded, because her noble instincts were
awakened, yet the very consciousness of her early degradation brings
with it the feeling of horror for her past life, alike torturing and
enduring,--she feels, as she had described, that, alas! there are stains
which nothing can remove.

"Ah, unhappiness for me!" said the Goualeuse, in despair; "my whole life
has long to run, it may be; were it as long, as pure as your own,
father, it must henceforth be blighted by the knowledge and
consciousness of the past; unhappiness for me for ever!"

"On the contrary, Marie, it is happiness for you,--yes, happiness for
you. Your remorse, so full of bitterness, but so purifying, testifies
the religious susceptibility of your mind. How many there are who, less
nobly sensitive than you, would, in your place, have soon forgotten the
fact, and only revelled in the delight of the present. Believe me, every
pang that you now endure will tell in your favour when on high. God has
left you for a moment in an unrighteous path, to reserve for you the
glory of repentance and the everlasting reward reserved for expiation.
Has he not said himself, 'Those who fight the good fight and come to me
with a smile on their lips, they are my chosen; but they who, wounded in
the struggle, come to me fainting and dying, they are the chosen amongst
my chosen!' Courage, then, my child! Support, help, counsel,--nothing
will fail you. I am very aged, but Madame Georges and M. Rodolph have
still many years before them; particularly M. Rodolph, who has taken so
deep an interest in you, who watches your progress with so much
anxiety."

[Illustration: "'_So I Have Brought Turk with Me_'"
Original Etching by Adrian Marcel]

The Goualeuse was about to reply, when she was interrupted by the
peasant girl whom we have already mentioned, who, having followed in the
steps of the curé and Marie, now came up to them. She was one of the
peasants of the farm.

"Beg your pardon, M. le Curé," she said to the priest, "but Madame
Georges told me to bring this basket of fruit to the rectory, and then I
could accompany Mlle. Marie back again, for it is getting late. So I
have brought Turk with me," added the dairy-maid, patting an enormous
dog of the Pyrenees, which would have mastered a bear in a struggle.
"Although we never have any bad people about us here in the country, it
is as well to be careful."

"You are quite right, Claudine. Here we are now at the rectory. Pray
thank Madame Georges for me."

Then addressing the Goualeuse in a low tone, the curé said to her, in a
grave voice:

"I must go to-morrow to the conference of the diocese, but I shall
return at five o'clock. If you like, my child, I will wait for you at
the rectory. I see your state of mind, and that you require a lengthened
conversation with me."

"I thank you, father," replied Fleur-de-Marie. "To-morrow I will come,
since you are so good as to allow me to do so."

"Here we are at the garden gate," said the priest. "Leave your basket
there, Claudine; my housekeeper will take it. Return quickly to the farm
with Marie, for it is almost night, and the cold is increasing.
To-morrow, Marie, at five o'clock."

"To-morrow, father."

The abbé went into his garden. The Goualeuse and Claudine, followed by
Turk, took the road to the farm.




CHAPTER VI.

THE RENCOUNTER.


The night set in clear and cold. Following the advice of the
Schoolmaster, the Chouette had gone to that part of the hollow way which
was the most remote from the path, and nearest to the cross-road where
Barbillon was waiting with the hackney-coach. Tortillard, who was posted
as an advanced guard, watched for the return of Fleur-de-Marie, whom he
was desirous of drawing into the trap by begging her to come to the
assistance of a poor old woman. The son of Bras Rouge had advanced a few
steps out of the ravine to try and discern Marie, when he heard the
Goualeuse some way off speaking to the peasant girl who accompanied her.
The plan had failed; and Tortillard quickly went down into the ravine to
run and inform the Chouette.

"There is somebody with the young girl," said he, in a low and
breathless tone.

"May the hangman squeeze her weasand, the little beggar," exclaimed the
Chouette in a rage.

"Who's with her?" asked the Schoolmaster.

"Oh, no doubt, the country wench who passed along the road just now,
followed by a large dog. I heard a woman's voice," said Tortillard.
"Hark!--do you hear? There's the noise of their sabots," and, in the
silence of the night, the wooden soles sounded clearly on the ground
hardened by the frost.

"There are two of 'em. I can manage the young 'un in the gray mantle,
but what can we do with t'other? _Fourline_ can't see, and Tortillard
is too weak to do for the companion--devil choke her! What can be done?"
asked the Chouette.

"I'm not strong, but, if you like, I'll cling to the legs of the
country-woman with the dog. I'll hold on by hands and teeth, and not let
her go, I can tell you. You can take away the little one in the
meantime, you know, Chouette."

"If they cry or resist, they will hear them at the farm," replied the
Chouette, "and come to their assistance before we can reach Barbillon's
coach. It is no easy thing to carry off a woman who resists."

"And they have a large dog with them," said Tortillard.

"Bah! bah! If it was only that, I could break the brute's skull with a
blow of my shoe-heel," said the Chouette.

"Here they are," replied Tortillard, who was listening still to the echo
of their footsteps. "They are coming down the hollow now."

"Why don't you speak, _fourline_?" said the Chouette to the
Schoolmaster. "What is best to be done, long-headed as you are, eh? Are
you grown dumb?"

"There's nothing to be done to-day," replied the miscreant.

"And the thousand 'bob' of the man in mourning," said the Chouette;
"they are gone, then? I'd sooner--Your knife--your knife, _fourline_! I
will stick the companion, that she may be no trouble to us; and, as to
the young miss, Tortillard and I can make off with her."

"But the man in mourning does not desire that we should kill any one."

"Well, then, we must put the cold meat down as an extra in his bill. He
must pay, for he will be an accomplice with us."

"Here they come--down the hill," said Tortillard, softly.

"Your knife, lad!" said the Chouette, in a similar tone.

"Ah, Chouette," cried Tortillard, in alarm, and extending his hands to
the hag, "that is too bad--to kill. No!--oh, no!"

"Your knife, I tell you!" repeated the Chouette, in an undertone,
without paying the least attention to Tortillard's supplication, and
putting her shoes off hastily. "I have taken off my shoes," she added,
"that I may steal on them quietly from behind. It is almost dark; but I
can easily make out the little one by her cloak, and I will do for the
other."

"No," said the felon; "to-day it is useless. There will be plenty of
time to-morrow."

"What! you're afraid, old patterer, are you?" said the Chouette, with
fierce contempt.

"Not at all," replied the Schoolmaster. "But you may fail in your blow
and spoil all."

The dog which accompanied the country-woman, scenting the persons hidden
in the hollow road, stopped short, and barked furiously, refusing to
come to Fleur-de-Marie, who called him frequently.

"Do you hear their dog? Here they are! Your knife!--or, if not--" cried
the Chouette, with a threatening air.

"Come and take it from me, then--by force," said the Schoolmaster.

"It's all over--it's too late," added the Chouette, after listening for
a moment attentively; "they have gone by. You shall pay for that,
gallows-bird," added she, furiously, shaking her fist at her accomplice.
"A thousand francs lost by your stupidity!"

"A thousand--two thousand--perhaps three thousand gained," replied the
Schoolmaster, in a tone of authority. "Listen, Chouette! Do you go back
to Barbillon, and let him drive you to the place where you were to meet
the man in mourning. Tell him that it was impossible to do anything
to-day, but that to-morrow she shall be carried off. The young girl goes
every evening to walk home with the priest, and it was only a chance
which to-day led her to meet with any one. To-morrow we shall have a
more secure opportunity. So to-morrow do you return and be with
Barbillon at the cross-road in his coach at the same hour."

"But thou--thou?"

"Tortillard shall lead me to the farm where the young girl lives. I will
cook up some tale--say we have lost our road, and ask leave to pass the
night at the farm in a corner of the stable. No one could refuse us
that. Tortillard will examine all the doors, windows, and ins and outs
of the house. There is always money to be looked for amongst these
farming people. You say the farm is situated in a lone spot; and, when
once we know all the ways and outlets, we need only return with some
safe friends, and the thing is done as easy--"

"Always 'downy!' What a head-piece!" said the Chouette, softening. "Go
on, _fourline_."

"To-morrow morning, instead of leaving the farm, I will complain of a
pain which prevents me from walking. If they will not believe me, I'll
show them the wound which I have always had since I smashed the 'loop of
my darbies,' and which is always painful to me. I'll say it is a burn I
had from a red-hot bar when I was a workman, and they'll believe me.
I'll remain at the farm part of the day, whilst Tortillard looks about
him. When the evening comes on, and the little wench goes out as usual
with the priest, I'll say I'm better, and fit to go away. Tortillard and
I will follow the young wench at a distance, and await your coming to us
here. As she will know us already, she will have no mistrust when she
sees us. We will speak to her, Tortillard and I; and, when once within
reach of my arms, I will answer for the rest. She's caught safe enough,
and the thousand francs are ours. That is not all. In two or three days
we can 'give the office' of the farm to Barbillon and some others, and
share with them if they get any 'swag,' as it will be me who put them on
the 'lay.'"

"Well done, No-Eyes! No one can come up to you," said the Chouette,
embracing the Schoolmaster. "Your plan is capital! Tell you what,
_fourline_, when you are done up and old, you must turn consulting
'prig'; you will earn as much money as a 'big-wig.' Come, kiss your old
woman, and be off as quick as you may, for these joskins go to sleep
with their poultry. I shall go to Barbillon; and to-morrow, at four
o'clock, we will be at the cross-road with the 'trap,' unless he is
nabbed for having assisted Gros-Boiteux and the Skeleton to 'do for' the
milk-woman's husband in the Rue de la Vieille-Draperie. But if he can't
come, another can, for the pretended hackney-coach belongs to the man in
mourning who has used it before. A quarter of an hour after we get to
the cross-road, I will be here and wait for you."

"All right! Good-by till to-morrow, Chouette."

"I had nearly forgot to give the wax to Tortillard, if there is any lock
to get the print of at the farm. Here, chickabiddy, do you know how to
use it?" said the one-eyed wretch to Tortillard, as she gave him a piece
of wax.

"Yes, yes, my father showed me how to use it. I took for him the print
of the lock of the little iron chest which my master, the quack doctor,
keeps in his small closet."

"Ah, that's all right; and, that the wax may not stick, do not forget to
moisten the wax after you have warmed it well in your hand."

"I know all about it," replied Tortillard.

"To-morrow, them, _fourline_," said the Chouette.

"To-morrow," replied the Schoolmaster.

The Chouette went towards the coach. The Schoolmaster and Tortillard
quitted the hollow way, and bent their steps towards the farm, the
lights which shone from the windows serving to guide them on their way.

Strange fatality, which again brought Anselm Duresnel under the same
roof with his wife, who had not seen him since his condemnation to hard
labour for life!




CHAPTER VII.

AN EVENING AT THE FARM.


Perhaps a more gratifying sight does not exist than the interior of a
large farm-kitchen prepared for the evening meal, especially during the
winter season. Its bright wood fire, the long table covered with the
savoury, smoking dishes, the huge tankards of foaming beer or cider,
with the happy countenances scattered round, speak of peaceful labour
and healthful industry. The farm-kitchen of Bouqueval was a fine
exemplification of this remark. Its immense open chimney, about six feet
high and eight feet wide, resembled the yawning mouth of some huge oven.
On the hearth blazed and sparkled enormous logs of beech or oak; and
from this prodigious brazier there issued forth such a body of light, as
well as heat, that the large lamp suspended from the centre beam sunk
into insignificance, and was rendered nearly useless. Every variety of
culinary utensils, sparkling in all the brightness of the most elaborate
cleanliness, and composed invariably of copper, brass, and tin, glowed
in the bright radiance of the winter fire, as they stood ranged with the
utmost nicety and effect on their appropriate shelves. An old-fashioned
cistern of elaborately polished copper showed its bright face, polished
as a mirror; and close beside stood a highly polished bread-trough and
cover, composed of walnut-tree wood, rubbed by the hand of housewifery
till you could see your face in it and from which issued a most tempting
smell of hot bread. A long and substantial table occupied the centre of
the kitchen; a tablecloth, which, though coarse in texture, vied with
the falling snow for whiteness, covered its entire length; while for
each expected guest was placed an earthenware plate, brown without, but
white within, and by its side a knife, fork, and spoon, lustrous as
silver itself. In the midst of the table, an immense tureen of vegetable
soup smoked like the crater of a volcano, and diffused its savoury
vapours over a dish of ham and greens, flanked by a most formidable
array of mutton, most relishly stewed with onions and potatoes. Below
was placed a large joint of roast veal, followed by two great plates of
winter salad, supported by a couple of baskets of apples; and a similar
number of cheeses completed the arrangements of the table. Three or four
stone pitchers filled with sparkling cider, and a like quantity of
loaves of brown bread, equal in size to the stones of a windmill, were
placed at the discretionary use of the supping party.

An old, shaggy, black shepherd dog, almost toothless, the superannuated
patriarch of all the canine tribe employed on the farm, was, by reason
of his great age and long services, indulged with permission to enjoy
the cheering warmth of the chimney-corner; but, using his privilege with
the utmost modesty and discretion, this venerable servitor, who answered
to the pastoral name of Lysander, lay quietly stretched out in a secure
side-nook, his nose resting on his paws, watching with the deepest
attention the various culinary preparations which preceded the supper.

The bill of fare thus presented to the reader, as the ordinary mode of
living at the farm of Bouqueval, may strike some of our readers as
unnecessarily sumptuous; but Madame Georges, faithfully following out
the wishes of Rodolph, endeavoured by all possible means to improve the
comforts of the labourers on the farm, who were always selected as being
the most worthy and industrious individuals of their district. They
were well paid, liberally treated, and so kindly used that to be
engaged on the Bouqueval farm was the highest ambition of all the best
labourers in that part of the country--an ambition which most
essentially promoted the welfare and advantage of the masters they then
served; for no applicant for employment at Bouqueval could obtain a
favourable hearing, unless he came provided with most satisfactory
testimonials from his last employer.

Thus, though on a very small scale, had Rodolph created a species of
model farm, which had for its aim not only the improvement of animals
and agricultural operations, but, above all, improving the nature of man
himself; and this he effected by making it worth their while to be
active, honest, and intelligent.

After having completed all the preparations for supper, and placed on
the table a jug of wine to accompany the dessert, the farm-cook sounded
the welcome tocsin, which told all that the cheering meal was prepared,
and, their evening toil concluded, they might freely enjoy the delights
of wholesome and temperate refreshment. Ere the sound had ceased to
vibrate on the ear, a merry, joyous throng, composed of men and maidens
to the number of twelve or fifteen, crowded around the table; the men
had open, manly countenances, the women looked healthy and
good-humoured, while the young girls belonging to the party wore the
brightest glow of youth and innocence. Every face was lighted up with
frank gaiety, content, and the satisfaction arising from the
consciousness of having well fulfilled one's duty. Thus happily prepared
in mind and body to do justice to the excellent fare set before them,
the happy party took their appointed places at table.

The upper end was occupied by an old, white-haired labourer, whose fine,
bold, yet sensible expression of face, bespoke him a descendant of the
ancient Gaulish mothers of the soil.

Father Châtelain (for so was this Nestor called) had worked on the farm
from his early childhood. When Rodolph purchased the farm, the old
servant had been strongly recommended to him, and he was forthwith
raised to the rank of overlooker, and, under the orders of Madame
Georges, general superintendent of all outdoor work; and unbounded,
indeed, was the influence possessed by Father Châtelain by virtue of his
age, his knowledge, and experience.

Every one having taken their seat, Father Châtelain, having fervently
invoked a blessing, then, in pursuance of an ancient and pious custom,
marked one of the loaves with the figure of a cross, and cut off a large
slice as the share of the Virgin or the poor, then, pouring out a glass
of wine with a similar consecration to charitable purposes, he
reverently placed both bread and wine on a plate placed in the centre of
the table purposely to receive them. At this moment the yard dogs barked
furiously; old Lysander replied by a low growl, and, curling back his
upper lip, displayed two or three still formidable fangs.

"Some person is passing near the wall of the courtyard," observed Father
Châtelain.

Scarcely had the words been uttered, than the bell of the great gate
sounded.

"Who can this possibly be at so late an hour?" said the old labourer;
"every one belonging to the place is in. Go and see who it is, Jean
René."

The individual thus addressed was a stout, able-bodied young labourer on
the farm, who was then busily employed blowing his scalding hot soup,
with a force of lungs that Æolus himself might have envied; but, used to
prompt obedience, in a moment the half-raised spoon was deposited in its
place, and, half stifling a sigh of regret, he departed on his errand.

"This is the first time our good Madame Georges and Mlle. Marie have
failed paying a visit to the warm chimney-corner, and looking on whilst
we took our supper, for this long time," said Father Châtelain. "I am
hungry as a hunter, but I shall not relish my supper half so well."

"Madame Georges is in the chamber of Mlle. Marie, who found herself
somewhat indisposed on her return from escorting M. le Curé to the
rectory," replied Claudine, the girl who had conducted La Goualeuse back
from the rectory, and thus unconsciously frustrated the evil designs of
the Chouette.

"I trust Mlle. Marie is only indisposed, not seriously ill, is she,
Claudine?" inquired the old man, with almost paternal anxiety.

"Oh, dear, no, Father Châtelain! God forbid! I hope and believe our dear
mademoiselle is only just a little struck with the cold of the night,
and her walk perhaps fatigued her. I trust she will be quite well by
to-morrow; indeed Madame Georges told me as much, and said that, if she
had had any fears, she should have sent to Paris for M. David, the negro
doctor, who took such care of mademoiselle when she was so ill. Well, I
cannot make out how any one can endure a black doctor! For my part I
should not have the slightest confidence in anything he said or did. No,
no! if one must have a doctor, let it be a Christian man with a white
skin; but a downright blackamoor! O saints above! why, the very sight of
him by my bedside would kill me!"

"But did not this Monsieur David cure Mlle. Marie from the long illness
with which she suffered when she first came here?" inquired the old man.

"Yes, Father Châtelain, he certainly did."

"Well?"

"Ah! but for all that, Father Châtelain, a doctor with a black face is
enough to terrify any one--I should scream myself into fits if he were
to come rolling up the great whites of his eyes at me."

"But is not this M. David the same person who cured Dame Anica of that
dreadful wound in her leg, which had confined her to her bed for upwards
of three years?"

"Yes, exactly so, Father Châtelain; he certainly did set old Dame Anica
up again."

"Well, then, my child?"

"Nay, but only think!--a black man! and when one is ill, too! when one
can so ill bear up against such horrid things. If he were only a little
dark, or even deep brown, but quite, quite a black--all black--oh,
Father Châtelain, I really cannot bring myself to think of it!"

"Tell me, my child, what colour is your favourite heifer Musette?"

"Oh, white--white as a swan, Father Châtelain; and such a milcher! I can
say that for the poor thing without the least falsehood, a better cow we
have not got on the farm."

"And your other favourite, Rosette?"

"Rosette? Oh, she is as black as a raven, not one white hair about her I
should say; and, indeed, to do her justice, she is a first-rate milcher
also. I hardly know which is the best, she or my pretty Musette."

"And what coloured milk does she give?"

"Why, white, of course, Father Châtelain; I really thought you knew
that."

"Is her milk as white and as good as the milk of your snowy pet,
Musette?"

"Every bit as good in colour and quality."

"Although Rosette is a black cow?"

"To be sure! why, Father Châtelain, what difference can it possibly make
to the milk whether the cow that gives it is black, white, red, or
brown?"

"How, then, my good girl, can it in any way signify whether a doctor has
a black or white skin, or what his complexion may be?"

"Well," answered Claudine, fairly hunted into a corner from which no
argument could rescue her,--"well, as regards what makes a black doctor
not so good as a white one, it is--it is, because a black skin is so
very ugly to look at, and a white one is so much more agreeable to one's
eyes; I'm sure I can't think of any other reason, Father Châtelain, if I
try for ever; but with cows the colour of the skin makes not the very
least difference, of that you may be assured; but, then, you know
there's a deal of difference between a cow and a man."

These not very clear physiognomical reflections of Claudine, touching
the effect of light or dark skins in the human and animal race, were
interrupted by the return of Jean René, blowing his fingers with
animation as he had before blown his soup.

"Oh, how cold! how cold it is this night!" exclaimed he, on entering;
"it is enough to freeze one to death; it is a pretty deal more snug and
comfortable in-doors than out this bitter night. Oh, how cold it is!"

"Why,--

      'The frost that cometh from North and East
       Biteth the most and ceaseth the least.'

Don't you know that, my lad?" said the old superintendent Châtelain.
"But who was it that rang so late?"

"A poor blind man and a boy who leads him about, Father Châtelain."

"And what does this poor blind man want?" inquired Châtelain.

"The poor man and his son were going by the cross-road to Louvres, and
have lost themselves in the snow; and as the cold is enough to turn a
man into an icicle, and the night is pitch dark, the poor blind father
has come to entreat permission for himself and lad to pass the night on
the farm; he says he shall be for ever thankful for leave to lie on a
little straw under a hovel, or in any out-building."

"Oh, as for that, I am quite sure that Madame Georges, who never refuses
charity to any unfortunate being, will willingly permit them to do so;
but we must first acquaint her with it; go, Claudine, and tell her the
whole story." Claudine disappeared.

"And where is this poor man waiting?" asked Father Châtelain.

"In the little barn just by."

"But why in the barn? why put him there?"

"Bless you, if I had left him in the yard, the dogs would have eaten him
up alive! Why, Father Châtelain, it was no use for me to call out
'Quiet, Médor! come here, Turk! down, Sultan!' I never saw dogs in such
a fury. And, besides, we don't use our dogs on the farm to fly at poor
folks, as they are trained to do at other places."

"Well, my lads, it seems that the 'share for the poor' has not been laid
aside in vain to-night. But try and sit a little closer; there, that'll
do; now put two more plates and knives and forks for this blind
traveller and his boy, for I feel quite certain what Madame Georges's
answer will be, and that she will desire them to be housed here for the
night."

"It is really a thing I can't make out," said Jean René, "about the dogs
being so very violent, especially Turk, who went with Claudine this
evening to the rectory. Why, when I stroked him, to try and pacify him,
I felt his coat standing up on end like so many bristles of a porcupine.
Now, what do you say to that, eh, Father Châtelain--you who know almost
everything?"

"Why, my lad, I, 'who know everything,' say just this, that the beasts
know far more than I do, and can see farther. I remember, in the autumn,
when the heavy rains had so swollen the little river, I was returning
with my team-horses one dark night--I was riding upon Cuckoo, the old
roan horse, and deuce take me if I could make out any spot it would be
safe to wade through, for the night was as dark as the mouth of a pit.
Well, I threw the bridle on old Cuckoo's back, and he soon found what,
I'll answer for it, none of us could have discovered. Now, who taught
the dumb brute to know the safe from the unsafe parts of the stream, let
me ask you?"

"Ay, Father Châtelain, that's what I was waiting to ask you. Who taught
the old roan to discover danger and escape from it so cleverly?"

"The same Almighty wisdom which instructs the swallow to build in our
chimneys, and guides the marten to make his nest among the reeds of our
banks, my lad. Well, Claudine," said the ancient oracle of the kitchen
to the blooming dairymaid, who just then entered, bearing on her arms
two pairs of snowy white sheets, from which an odoriferous smell of sage
and thyme was wafted along,--"well, I make no doubt but Madame Georges
has sent permission for these poor creatures, the blind man and his
child, to sleep here, has she not?"

"These sheets are to prepare beds for them, in the little room at the
end of the passage," said Claudine.

"Go and bid them come in, then, Jean René; and you, Claudine, my good
girl, put a couple of chairs near the fire--they will be glad of a good
warm before sitting down to table."

The furious barking of the dogs was now renewed, mingled with the voice
of Jean René, who was endeavoring to pacify them; the door of the
kitchen was abruptly opened, and the Schoolmaster and Tortillard entered
with as much precipitation as though they feared a pursuit from some
dangerous foe.

"For the love of heaven, keep off your dogs!" cried the Schoolmaster, in
the utmost terror; "they have been trying to bite us!"

"They have torn a great bit out of my blouse," whined Tortillard,
shivering with cold and pale with fear.

"Don't be frightened, good man," said Jean René, shutting the door
securely; "but I never before saw our dogs in such a perfect fury--it
must be the cold makes them so spiteful; perhaps, being half frozen,
they fancied biting you would serve to warm them--there is no knowing
what mere animals may mean by what they do."

"Why, are you going to begin, too?" exclaimed the old farmer, as
Lysander, who had hitherto lain perfectly happy in the radiance of the
glowing fire, started up, and, growling fiercely, was about to fly at
the strangers. "This old dog is quiet enough, but, having heard the
other dogs make such a furious noise, he thinks he must do the same.
Will you lie down and be quiet, you old brute? Do you hear, sir? lie
down!"

At these words from Father Châtelain, accompanied by a significant
motion of the foot, Lysander, with a low, deep growl of dissatisfaction,
slowly returned to his favourite corner by the hearth, while the
Schoolmaster and Tortillard remained trembling by the kitchen-door, as
though fearful of approaching farther. The features of the ruffian were
so hideous, from the frightful effects produced by the cold, that some
of the servants in the kitchen shuddered with alarm, while others
recoiled in disgust; this impression was not lost on Tortillard, who
felt reassured by the terrors of the villagers, and even felt proud of
the repulsiveness of his companion. This first confusion over, Father
Châtelain, thinking only of worthily discharging the duties of
hospitality, said to the Schoolmaster:

"Come, my good friend--come near the fire and warm yourself thoroughly,
and then you shall have some supper with us; for you happened to come
very fortunately, just as we were sitting down to table. Here, sit down,
just where I have placed your chair. But what am I thinking about?"
added the worthy old labourer. "I ought to have spoken to your son, not
you, seeing that it has pleased God to take away your eyesight--a heavy
loss, a heavy loss; but let us hope all for your good, my friend, though
you may not now think so. Here, my boy, lead your father to that snug
place in the chimney-corner."

"Yes, kind sir," drawled out Tortillard, with a nasal twang and canting,
hypocritical tone; "may God bless you for your charity to the poor
blind! Here, father, take my arm; lean on my shoulder, father; take
care, take care, gently;" and, with affected zeal and tenderness, the
urchin guided the steps of the brigand till they reached the indicated
spot. As the pair approached Lysander, he uttered a low, growling noise;
but as the Schoolmaster brushed past him, and the sagacious animal had
full scent of his garments, he broke out into one of those deep howls
with which, it is asserted by the superstitious, dogs frequently
announce an approaching death.

"What, in the devil's name, do all these cursed animals mean by their
confounded noise?" said the Schoolmaster to himself. "Can they smell the
blood on my clothes, I wonder? for I now recollect I wore the trousers I
have on at present the night the cattle-dealer was murdered."

"Did you notice that?" inquired Jean René of Father Châtelain. "Why, I
vow that, as often as old Lysander had caught scent of the wandering
stranger, he actually set up a regular death-howl."

And this remark was followed up by a most singular confirmation of the
fact; the cries of Lysander were so loud and mournful that the other
dogs caught the sound (for the farmyard was only separated from the
kitchen by a glazed window in the latter), and, according to the custom
of the canine race, they each strove who should outdo the other in
repeating and prolonging the funereal wail, which, according to vulgar
belief, always foretells death. Though but little given to superstitious
dread, the farm-people looked from one to another with a feeling of
wonder not unmixed with awe. Even the Schoolmaster himself, diabolically
hardened as he was, felt a cold shudder steal over him at the thought
that all these fatal sounds burst forth upon the approach of him--the
self-convicted murderer! while Tortillard, too audacious and hardened to
enter into such alarms, with all the infidelity in which he had been
trained, even from his mother's arms, looked on with delighted mockery
at the universal panic, and was, perhaps, the only person present devoid
of an uneasy feeling; but, once freed from his apprehensions of
suffering from the violence of the animals, he listened even with
pleasure to the horrible discord of their long-drawn-out wailings, and
felt almost tempted to pardon them the fright they had originally
occasioned him, in consideration of the perfect terror they had struck
into the inhabitants of the farm, and for the gratification he derived
from the convulsive horror of the Schoolmaster. But after the momentary
stupor had passed away Jean René again quitted the kitchen, and the loud
cracking of his whip soon put an end to the prophetic howlings of Médor,
Turk, and Sultan, and quickly dispersed them to their separate kennels,
and as the noise ceased, the gloomy cloud passed away from the kitchen,
and the peasants looked up with the same honest cheerfulness they had
worn upon the entrance of the two travellers. Ere long they had left off
wondering at the repulsive ugliness of the Schoolmaster, and only
thought with pity of his great affliction, in being blind; they
commiserated the lameness of the poor boy, admired the interesting
sharpness of his countenance, the deep, cute glance of his ever-moving
eye, and, above all, loaded him with praises for the extreme care and
watchfulness with which he attended to his afflicted parent. The
appetite of the labourers, which had been momentarily forgotten, now
returned with redoubled violence, and for a time nothing could be heard
but the clattering of plates and rattling of knives and forks. Still,
however busily employed with their suppers, the servants assembled round
the table, both male and female, could not but remark, with infinite
pleasure, the tender assiduity of the lad towards the blind creature who
sat beside him. Nothing could exceed the devoted affection and filial
care with which Tortillard prepared his meat for him, cutting both that
and his bread with most accurate nicety, pouring out his drink, and
never attempting even to taste a morsel himself, till his father
expressed himself as having completed his supper. But, for all this
dutiful attention, the young ruffian took ample and bitter revenge.
Instigated as much by an innate spirit of cruelty as the desire of
imitation natural to his age, Tortillard found an equal enjoyment with
the Chouette in having something to torment (_a bête de souffrance_);
and it was a matter of inexpressible exultation to his wretched mind
that he, a poor, distorted, crippled, abject creature, should have it in
his power to tyrannise over so powerful and ferocious a creature as the
Schoolmaster,--it was like torturing a muzzled tiger. He even refined
his gratification, by compelling his victim to endure all the agonies he
inflicted, without wincing or exhibiting the slightest external sign of
his suffering. Thus he accompanied each outward mark of devoted
tenderness towards his supposed parent, by aiming a severe kick against
the Schoolmaster's legs, on one of which there was (in common with many
who had long worked in the galleys) a deep and severe wound, the effect
of the heavy iron chain worn during the term of punishment around the
right leg; and, by way of compelling the miserable sufferer to exercise
a greater degree of stoical courage, the urchin always seized the moment
when the object of his malice was either drinking or speaking.

"Here, dear father! here is a nice peeled nut," said Tortillard, placing
on the plate of his supposed parent a nut carefully prepared.

"Good boy," said old Châtelain, smiling kindly at him. Then, addressing
the bandit, he added: "However great may be your affliction, my friend,
so good a son is almost sufficient to make up even for the loss of
sight; but Providence is so gracious, he never takes away one blessing
without sending another."

"You are quite right, kind sir! My lot is a very hard one, and, but for
the noble conduct of my excellent child, I--"

A sharp cry of irrepressible anguish here broke from the quivering lips
of the tortured man; the son of Bras Rouge had this time aimed his blow
so effectually, that the point of his heavy-nailed shoe had reached the
very centre of the wound, and produced unendurable agony.

"Father! dear father! what is the matter?" exclaimed Tortillard, in a
whimpering voice; then, suddenly rising, he threw both his arms round
the Schoolmaster's neck, whose first impulse of rage and pain was to
stifle the limping varlet in his Herculean grasp; and so powerfully did
he compress the boy's chest against his own, that his impeded
respiration vented itself in a low moaning sound. A few minutes, and
Tortillard's last prank would have been played; but, reflecting that the
lad was for the present indispensable to the furtherance of the schemes
he had on hand, the Schoolmaster, by a violent effort, controlled his
desire to annihilate his tormentor, and contented himself with pushing
him off his shoulders back into his own chair. The sympathising group
around the table were far from seeing through all this, and merely
considered these close embraces as an interchange of paternal and filial
tenderness, while the half suffocation and deadly pallor of Tortillard
they attributed to emotion caused by the sudden illness of his beloved
father.

"What ailed you just now, my good man?" inquired Father Châtelain; "only
see, you have quite frightened your poor boy. Why, he looks pale as
death, and can scarcely breathe. Come, my little man; you must not take
on so--your father is all right again."

"I beg your pardon, gentlemen all," replied the Schoolmaster,
controlling himself with much difficulty, for the pain he was still
enduring was most excruciating. "I am better now. I'll tell you, with
your kind leaves, all about it. You see I am by trade a working
locksmith, and, one day that I was employed in beating out a huge bar of
red hot iron, it fell over on my two legs, and burnt them so dreadfully
that it has never healed; unfortunately, just now, I happened to strike
the leg that is worst against the table, and the sudden agony it
occasioned me drew forth the sudden cry which so much disturbed all this
good company, and for which I humbly beg pardon."

"Poor dear father!" whined out Tortillard, casting a look of fiendish
malice at the shivering Schoolmaster, and wholly recovered from his late
attack of excessive emotion. "Poor father! you have indeed got a bad leg
nobody can cure. Ah, kind gentlemen, I hope you will never have such a
shocking wound, and be obliged to hear all the doctors say it never will
get well. No! never--never. Oh, my dear, dear father! how I wish I could
but suffer the pain instead of you!"

At this tender, moving speech, the females present expressed the utmost
admiration for the dutiful speaker, and began feeling in their vast
pockets for some more substantial mark of their regard.

"It is unlucky, my honest friend," said old Châtelain, addressing the
Schoolmaster, "you had not happened to come to this farm about three
weeks ago, instead of to-night."

"And why so, if you please?"

"Because we had staying for a few days in the house a celebrated Paris
doctor, who has an infallible remedy for all diseases of the legs. A
worthy old woman, belonging to our village, had been confined to her
bed upwards of three years with some affection of the legs. Well, this
doctor, being here, as I said, heard of the case, applied an unguent to
the wounds, and now, bless you, she is as surefooted, ay, and as swift,
too, as any of our young girls; and the first holiday she makes she
intends walking to the house of her benefactor, in the Allée des Veuves,
at Paris, to return her grateful thanks. To be sure it is a good step
from hence, but then, as Mother Anica says--Why, what has come over you
again, my friend? Is your leg still so painful?"

The mention of the Allée des Veuves had recalled such frightful
recollections to the Schoolmaster, that, involuntarily, a cold shudder
shook his frame, while a fearful spasm, by contracting his ghastly
countenance, made it appear still more hideous.

"Yes," replied he, trying to conceal his emotion, "a sudden darting pain
seized me, and--Pray excuse my interrupting your kind and sensible
discourse, and be pleased to proceed."

"It really is a great pity," resumed the old labourer, "that this
excellent doctor should not be with us at present; but I tell you what,
he is as good as he is skilful, and I am quite sure if you let your
little lad conduct you to his house when you return to Paris, that he
will cure you. His address is not difficult to recollect, it is 17 Allée
des Veuves. Even should you forget the number, it will not matter, for
there are but very few doctors in the neighbourhood, and no other negro
surgeon,--for, only imagine, this clever, kind, and charitable man is a
black, but his heart is white and good. His name is David,--Doctor
David,--you will be able to remember that name, I dare say."

The features of the Schoolmaster were so seamed and scarred that it was
difficult to perceive when his colour varied. He did, however, on the
present occasion, turn ghastly pale as he first heard the exact number
mentioned of Rodolph's house, and afterwards the description of the
black doctor,--of David, the negro surgeon, who, by Rodolph's orders,
had inflicted on him the fearful punishment, the terrible results of
which were each hour more painfully developed. Father Châtelain,
however, was too much interested in his subject to notice the deadly
paleness of the Schoolmaster, and proceeded with his discourse:

"When you leave us, my poor fellow, we will be sure to write his address
on a slip of paper and give it to your son, for I know that, besides
putting you in a certain way to be cured of your painful wound, it would
be gratifying to M. David to be able to relieve your sufferings. Oh, he
is so good,--never so happy as when he has rendered any person a
service. I wish he had not always that mournful and dejected look. I
fear he has some heavy care near his heart; and he is so good, so full
of pity for all who suffer. Well, well, Providence will bless him in
another world; but come, friend, let us drink to the health and
happiness of your future benefactor,--here take this mug."

"No, thank you!" returned the Schoolmaster, with a gloomy air; "none for
me. I--I am not thirsty, and I never drink unless I am."

"Nay, friend, but this is good old wine I have poured out for you; not
cider," said the labourer. "Many tradespeople do not drink as good.
Bless your heart, this farm is not conducted as other farms are,--what
do you think of our style of living, by the by? have you relished your
supper?"

"All very good," responded the Schoolmaster mechanically, more and more
absorbed in the painfulness of his ideas.

"Well, then, as we live one day, so we do another. We work well, we live
well, we have a good conscience, and an equally good bed to rest upon
after the labours of the day. Our lives roll on in peace and
contentment. There are seven labourers constantly employed on the farm,
who are paid almost double wages to what others get; but then I can
venture to assert, that if we are paid double, we do as much work among
us as fourteen ordinary labourers would do. The mere husbandry servants
have one hundred and fifty crowns a year, the dairy-women and other
females engaged about the place sixty crowns, and a tenth share of the
produce of the farm is divided among us all. You may suppose we do not
idle away much time, or fail to make hay while the sun shines, for
Nature is a bountiful mother, and ever returns a hundredfold to those
who assiduously seek her favour; the more we give her, the more she
returns."

"Your master cannot get very rich if he treats you and pays you thus
liberally," said the Schoolmaster.

"Oh, our master is different to all others, and has a mode of repaying
himself peculiarly his own."

"From what you say," answered the blind man, hoping by engaging in
conversation to escape from the gloominess of his own thoughts, "your
master must be a very extraordinary person."

"Indeed he is, my good man, a most uncommon master to meet with. Now, as
chance has brought you among us, and a strange though a lucky chance for
you it has proved, lying out of the highroad as this village does, it is
so very seldom any stranger ever finds it out. Well, I was going to say,
here you are, and no fault to find with your quarters, is there? Now, in
all human probability, when you turn your back upon the place you will
never return to it, but you shall not depart without hearing from me a
description of our master and all he has done for the farm, upon
condition that you promise to repeat it again wherever you go, and to
whomsoever you may meet with. You will see, I mean, I beg pardon, you
will then be able to understand."

"I listen to you," answered the Schoolmaster; "proceed."

"And I can promise you you will not be throwing away your time by
listening," replied the venerable Châtelain. "Now, one day our master
thought all at once: 'Here am I, rich enough to eat two dinners a day if
I liked, but I don't. Now, suppose I were to provide a meal for those
who have none at all, and enable such as can hardly procure half a
dinner to enjoy as much good food as they desired, would not that be
better than over-indulging myself? So it shall be,' says he, and away he
goes to work, and, first thing, he buys this farm, which was not much of
a concern then, and scarcely kept a couple of ploughs at work; and,
being born and bred on the place, I ought to know something about it.
Next, master made considerable additions to the farm. I'll tell you all
about that by and by. At the head of the farm he placed a most worthy
and respectable female, who had known a great deal of trouble in her
past life--master always chose out people for their goodness and their
misfortunes--and, when he brought the person I am telling you of here,
he said to her in my hearing, 'I wish this place to be like the Temple
of our great Maker, open to the deserving and the afflicted, but closed
against the wicked and hardened reprobate.' So idle beggars are always
turned from the gate; but those who are able and willing to work have
always the opportunity set before them: the charity of labour, our
master says, is no humiliation to him who receives it, but a favour and
service conferred on the person whose labour is thus done; and the rich
man who does not act upon this principle but ill employs his wealth. So
said our master. But he did more than talk--he acted. There was formerly
a road from here to Ecouen, which cut off a good mile of distance, but,
Lord love you! it was one great rutty bog, impossible to get up or down
it; it was the death of every horse, and certain destruction to every
vehicle that attempted to pass through it. A little labour, and a
trifling amount of money from each farmer in the adjoining country
would soon have repaired the road; but they never could be brought to
any unanimity on the subject, and, in proportion as one farmer would be
anxious to contribute towards putting the road in order, the others
would invariably decline sending either men or money to assist. So our
master, perceiving all this, said, 'The road shall be repaired; but as
those who can afford to contribute will not, and as it is more for
convenience and accommodation to the rich than necessity for the poor,
it shall first become useful to those who would work if they could get
it to do, who have heart, and hands, and courage, but no employ. Well,
this road shall be reserved as a constant occupation for persons of this
description. Horsemen and carriages belonging to the rich and affluent,
who care not how roads are repaired, so that they can travel at their
ease, may go round by the farther side.' So, for example, whenever a
strong, sturdy fellow presented himself at the farm, pleading hunger and
want of work, I'd say to him, 'Here, my lad; here is a basin of warm
nourishing soup--take it and welcome; then, if you wish for work, here
is a pickaxe and spade; one of our people will show you the Ecouen road;
make every day twelve feet of it good, by spreading and breaking the
flints; and every evening, after your work is examined, you shall
receive at the rate of forty sous for the quantity named; twenty sous
for half as much; ten sous for a quarter; for less than that, nothing at
all.' Then, towards evening, upon my return from labour, I used to go on
the road, measure their work, and examine whether it was well done."

"And only to think," interposed Jean René, in a fit of virtuous
indignation, "only think, now, of there coming two heartless vagabonds,
who drank their soup and walked off with the pickaxe and shovel. It is
enough to sicken one of doing good or trying to benefit one's fellow
creatures."

"Quite right, Master René," exclaimed the other labourers; "so it is."

"Come, come, lads," resumed Father Châtelain, "don't be too warm. Just
see here. We might as well say it is useless to plant trees, or sow
grain, because there are caterpillars, weevils, and other injurious
insects that gnaw the leaves or devour the seeds put in the ground. No,
no! we destroy the vermin. But God Almighty, who is no niggard, causes
fresh buds to burst forth and new ears of corn to sprout; the damage is
abundantly repaired, and no trace remains of the mischievous insects
which have passed over our work. Am I not right, my friend?" said the
old labourer, addressing the Schoolmaster.

"No doubt--no doubt," replied the latter, who had appeared for some time
past lost in a train of serious meditation.

"Then, as for women and children, there is plenty of occupation for them
also, according to their age and strength," added Father Châtelain.

"Yet, spite of all this," observed Claudine, joining in the
conversation, "the road gets on but very slowly."

"Which only goes to prove, my good girl, that in this part of the
country there is happily no scarcity of employment for the honest and
industrious labourer."

"But now, as in the case of a poor, helpless, afflicted creature such as
I am," said the Schoolmaster, hastily, "would not the worthy owner of
the farm grant me a humble corner in it for charity's sake--a shelter
and a morsel of bread for the little while I have to remain a burden to
any one in this troublesome world? Oh, my worthy sir, could I but obtain
such a boon I would pass the remainder of my days in praying for a
blessing on my benefactor."

And these words were really pronounced in entire sincerity of meaning;
not that compunction for his many crimes touched the brigand's stony
heart, but he contrasted the happy peacefulness of the lives of these
labourers to his own wretched, stormy existence; and still further did
he envy them when he reflected upon all that the Chouette might have in
store for him; he shuddered as he reflected upon the future she would
provide for him, and more than ever regretted, by having recalled his
old accomplice, having for ever lost the means of dwelling with good and
honest persons, such as those with whom the Chourineur had placed him.
Father Châtelain surveyed the Schoolmaster with an air of surprise.

"My good man," said he, "I did not know you were so utterly destitute."

"Alas! yes, it is even so. I lost my sight by an accident while working
at my trade. I am going to Louvres to endeavour to find a distant
relation there, who, I hope, may be willing to assist me. But, you are
aware, people are not always so open-hearted as they should be; they do
not like distressed objects, such as myself, coming to claim kindred,
and are frequently harsh and unkind," answered the Schoolmaster, sighing
deeply.

"But the most selfish heart would grieve at your distress," replied the
old labourer. "The most hard-hearted relative would pity a man like
you--a good and honest workman overtaken by a sudden calamity, and left
without hope or help. Then the moving spectacle of this young and tender
child, your only friend and guide, would wring pity from the very
stones. But how is it that the master for whom you worked previously to
your accident has done nothing for you?"

"He is now dead," said the Schoolmaster, after a short hesitation; "and
he was my only friend on earth."

"But then there is the hospital for the blind."

"I am not the right age to qualify me for admission."

"Poor man! yours is, indeed, a hard case."

"Do you think it likely that, in the event of my relation at Louvres
refusing to assist me, your master, whom I already respect without
knowing, would take pity on me?"

"Unfortunately, you see, the farm is not a hospital. Our general rule is
to grant all infirm or afflicted travellers a temporary shelter of a
night or a day in the house. Then some assistance is furnished, and they
are put on their road with a prayer to kind Providence to take them
under its charge."

"Then you think there is no hope of interesting your master in my
unhappy fate?" asked the brigand, with a sigh of regret.

"I tell you what is the general custom here, my good man; but so
compassionate a person as our master might go any lengths to serve you."

"Do you really think so?" said the Schoolmaster. "Oh, if he would but
permit me to remain here, I could live in any retired corner, and be
happy and grateful for such a mere trifle of subsistence!"

"As I said before, our master is capable of the most generous actions.
But, were he to consent to your remaining at the farm, there would be no
occasion for you to hide yourself; you would fare in every respect as
you have seen us treated to-day. Some occupation would be found for your
son suitable to his age and strength. He would not want for good
instruction or wise counsels; our venerable minister would teach him
with the other children of the village, and, in the words of Scripture,
he would grow in goodness and in stature beneath the pious care of our
excellent curé. But the best way for you to manage this will be to lay
every particular of your case and petition before our 'Lady of Ready
Help,' when she comes into the kitchen, as she is sure to do before you
start on your journey to-morrow morning."

"What name did you call your lady by?"

"Nay, I meant our mistress, who always goes by that appellation amongst
us. If she interests herself for you, your suit will be granted; for, in
matters of charity, our master never opposes her smallest wish."

"Oh, then," exclaimed the Schoolmaster, in a joyous tone, already
exulting in his hoped-for deliverance from the power of the Chouette, "I
will thankfully follow your advice, and speak to her whenever I have the
blessed opportunity!"

This hope found no echo in the mind of Tortillard, who felt not the
slightest disposition to avail himself of the offers of the old
labourer, and grow up in goodness under the auspices of the venerable
curé. The inclinations of Bras Rouge's son were anything but rural,
neither did his turn of mind incline to the pastoral. Faithful to the
code of morality professed by the Chouette, and promulgated by her, he
would have been severely distressed to see the Schoolmaster emancipate
himself from their united tyranny; and he now thought it high time to
recall the brigand from the illusory visions of flowery meads and all
the _et coeteras_ of a country life, in which his fancy seemed
revelling, to the realities of his present position.

"Yes, oh, yes," repeated the Schoolmaster; "I will assuredly address my
prayers to your 'Lady of Ready Help.' She will pity me and kindly--"

Tortillard here interrupted him by a vigorous and artfully managed kick,
so well directed, that, as before, it took the direst effect on the most
sensitive spot. The intense agony for a time quite bereft the brigand of
speech or breath; but remembering the fatal consequences of giving way
to the feelings which boiled within him, he struggled for self-command,
and, after a pause of a few minutes, added, in a faint and suffering
voice, "Yes, I venture to hope your good mistress would pity and
befriend me."

"Dear father," said Tortillard, in a hypocritical tone, "you forget my
poor dear aunt, Madame la Chouette, who is so fond of you. Poor Aunty
Chouette, she would never part with you so easily, I know. Directly she
heard of your staying here, she would come along with M. Barbillon and
fetch you away--that she would, I know."

"Madame la Chouette and M. Barbillon. Why this honest man seems to have
relations among all the 'birds of the air and fishes of the sea,'"
uttered Jean René in a voice of mirthful irony, giving his neighbour
rather a vigorous poke with his elbow. "Funny, isn't it, Claudine?"

"Oh, you great unfeeling calf! How can you make a joke on these poor
creatures?" replied the tender-hearted dairy-maid, returning Jean René's
thrust with sufficient interest to compromise the safety of his ribs.

"Is Madame la Chouette a relation of yours?" inquired the old labourer
of the Schoolmaster.

"Yes, a distant one," answered the other, with a dull, dejected manner.

"And is she the person you were going to Louvres to try and find?" asked
Father Châtelain.

"She is," replied the blind man; "but I think my son overrates her zeal
on my account. However, under any circumstances, I shall speak to your
excellent lady to-morrow, and entreat her aid to further my request with
the kind, charitable owner of this farm, but," added he, purposely to
divert the conversation into another channel, and so put an end to the
imprudent remarks of Tortillard, "talking of farms, you promised to
explain to me the difference that exists in the management of this farm
and farms in general."

"I did so," replied Father Châtelain, "and I will keep my word. Now,
after having planned all I told you about the charity of labour, our
master said to himself, 'There are many institutions where plans are
devised, and rewards assigned, for improvements in the breed of horses,
cattle, sheep, and other animals for the best constructed ploughs, and
other agricultural implements. And I cannot help thinking that all this
time we are not going to the fountain-head, and beginning, as we ought
to begin, by improving the condition of the labouring classes
themselves, before we give all this heed to the beast which perisheth.
Good beasts are capital things, but good men are better, and more
difficult to meet with. Give your horses and cattle plenty of good food,
clear running water; place them either out-of-doors in a fine, healthy
atmosphere, or give them a clean, well-managed stable, with good and
regular attendance, and they will thrive to your heart's content, and be
capable of reaching any degree of excellence. But with men, look you, it
is quite another thing. You cannot elevate a man's mind as you can
fatten an ox. The animal fattens on his pasture because its taste
gratifies his palate; he eats because he likes what he feeds on, and his
body profits and thrives in proportion to the pleasure with which he has
devoured his food. Well, then, my opinion is, that to make good advice
really profitable to men, they should be enabled clearly to perceive
their own personal advantage in following it.'"

"Just as the ox is profited by eating the fine grass that grows around
him, Father Châtelain?" said several voices.

"Precisely the same."

"But, Father Châtelain," exclaimed another voice. "I have heard talk of
a sort of farm where young thieves, who might in other respects have
conducted themselves very well, are taken in, taught all sorts of
farming knowledge, and fed and treated like princes."

"You have heard quite right, my good fellow, there is such an
institution, and, as far as it goes, is founded on pure and just
motives, and is calculated to do much good. We should never despair for
the wicked, but we should also hope all things for the good. Suppose now
a strong, healthy, and industrious young man, of excellent character,
ready and willing to work, but desirous of receiving good instruction in
his way of life, were to present himself at the place you are speaking
of--this farm of reclaimed thieves--well, the first question would be,
'Well, my chap, are you a rogue and a vagabond?' 'No!' 'Oh, then we
can't receive you here--we've no room for honest lads.'"

"What you say, father, is right, every word of it," rejoined Jean René.
"Rascals are provided for, while honest men want; and beasts are
considered, and their condition continually improved, while men are
passed over and left in ignorance and neglect."

"It was purposely to remedy what you complain of, my brave lad, that our
master took this farm (as I was mentioning to our blind visitor). 'I
know very well,' said he, 'that honest men will be rewarded on high, but
then, you see, it is far and long to look forward to, and there are many
(and much to be pitied are they) who can neither look to such a
distance, nor wait with patience the indefinite period which bids them
live on hope alone. Then how are these poor, depressed, and toil-worn
creatures to find leisure thus to seek religious comfort? Rising at the
first dawn of day, they toil and labour with weary limbs, till night
releases them and sends them to their wretched hovels. Sunday is spent
by them at the public-house, drinking to drive away the recollections
both of their past and future wretchedness. Neither can these poor
beings turn their very hardships to a good account by extracting a
useful moral from them. After a hard day's work does their bread seem
less coarse and black, their pallet less hard, their infants less sickly
and meagre, their wives less worn down by giving nourishment to the
feeble babes of their breast? No, no, far from it. Alas, the thin,
half-starved mother is but ill calculated to nourish another, when she
is obliged to yield her slender share of the family meal to still the
clamours of her famishing children. Yet all this might be endured, aye,
even cheerfully, for use has familiarised them with hardships and
privations; their bread is food, though coarse and homely, their straw
bed rests their weary limbs, and their children, though stunted and
sickly, live on. All these, I say, could be borne, did no comparison
arise between their own poverty and the condition of others; but, when
they visit the town or city on market-days, they see an abundance of
good white loaves crowding the windows of the bakers' shops; warm, soft
mattresses and blankets are displayed for sale to such as have the means
of purchasing; children fresh and blooming as the flowers of May are
playing joyously about, and even from the superabundance of their meals
casting a portion to the dogs and other pet animals. Ah! human courage
gives way at this reverse in the picture of human condition; and when
the tired, care-worn men return to their mud hovels, their black bread
and straw pallet, and are surrounded by a number of squalid,
half-starved, wailing infants, to whom they would gladly have brought
the share of cakes and buns thrown by the pampered children of great
towns in the streets, or cast to the animals, then bitter discontent and
repining take possession of their mind, and, utterly forgetting that on
high is One who careth for all, they say, "Why is this difference
allowed? and, if there must be both rich and poor in the world, why were
not we born to riches? why should not every man have his turn in worldly
prosperity? We are not justly used or fairly treated in being always
poor and hard worked." Of course, all this is both sinful and
unreasonable; neither does it in any manner serve to lighten their load;
and yet they must go on, bending, staggering under the burden too heavy
for them to bear, till they sink, utterly exhausted and worn out. They
must toil, toil on, without hope, without relaxing their daily efforts,
or without once daring to entertain the idea that, by a long continuance
in honest, virtuous, industrious conduct, the day might come when, like
the great Creator of all, they might rest from their labours, and behold
peaceful ease succeeding the hard-griping hand of poverty. Think of a
whole life passed thus, in one continued struggle for the bare means of
life, without a glimmer of hope to cheer the thorny path. What must such
a life be like? Why, it would resemble one long rainy day, without a
single ray of brightness from the blessed sun to help us through it.
Then labour is resumed with an unwilling and dissatisfied spirit. "What
does it signify to us," cry the worn-out labourers, "whether the harvest
yields ill or well? Whether the ears of corn be heavy or light makes no
difference to us. Why should we overwork ourselves, or trouble our heads
with matters that only concern our master? It is sufficient for us to
act with strict honesty. We will not commit any crime, because there are
laws ready to punish such as do; but neither will we try to perform acts
of goodness, because for those the laws provide no recompense." Such a
mode of arguing, my boys, is as unwise as it is wrong and sinful, but,
depend upon it, it is true to nature. From this indifference comes
idleness, and from idleness to crime the distance is very short. Now,
unfortunately, among the class I have been describing, the far greater
proportion consists of those whose conduct may be considered as neither
good nor bad, that is to say, without any particular leaning either way,
and, consequently, a mere trifle might firmly enlist them in the service
of virtue or vice. These are the very individuals,' continued our
master, 'we ought to try and improve, just as we should have done had
they been born to the honour of figuring as animals with hoofs, horns,
or woolly coats. Let us continue to point out to them how completely it
is to their interest to be active, industrious, steady, and well
qualified to discharge their several duties; let us effectually convince
them that, by becoming better men, they will also be much happier; let
them see how closely their good behaviour and prosperity are
interwoven, and, that good advice may sink the deeper into their hearts,
give them, as it were, such a taste of earthly comfort as shall, in a
slight degree, communicate to them the hope and notion of expecting the
unspeakable reward prepared by the Great Giver of all, whose dwelling is
on high.'

"Having well arranged his plans, our master caused it to be made known
in the environs that he wished to engage twelve farm servants, six men
and six females; but that his choice would be entirely regulated by the
most satisfactory certificates of good conduct obtained from the civil
and religious authorities in their native place. They were to be paid
like princes, fed upon the best food to their hearts' content; and
further, a tenth part of the produce of the harvest was to be shared
among the labourers. The engagement at the farm was to last but two
years, at the end of which time they were to give place to other
labourers, chosen upon the same terms; but, at the expiration of five
years, the original labourers were taken on again, in the event of there
being any vacancies; so that, since the establishment of this farm, it
is usual for the labourers and working classes in the neighbourhood to
say, 'Let us be active, honest, and industrious, so as to obtain a high
character for such good qualities, and, perhaps, one day we may be
fortunate to get engaged at Bouqueval Farm. There, for a couple of
years, we shall lead a life of perfect happiness. We shall learn our
business thoroughly; we shall save a little money, so that, when our
time is up, every one will be glad to engage us, because they know that
we must have had first-rate characters to have been admitted on the
establishment at all.'"

"I am already bespoke by M. Dubreuil for his farm at Arnouville," said
Jean René.

"And I am engaged to a first-rate service at Gonesse," chimed in another
labourer.

"You see, my good friend, by this plan everybody is a gainer, the
neighbouring farmers particularly. There are but twelve places for
servants on the farm, but there are, perhaps, fifty candidates who have
all earned their right to solicit an engagement by certificates and
testimonials of excellent conduct. Well, though thirty-eight out of the
fifty must be disappointed, yet the good which is in them will still
remain; and there are so many good and deserving characters in the
environs we can safely reckon upon; for, though they have failed in this
application, they still live in hopes of succeeding another time. Why,
for every prize animal to which the medal is assigned, whether for
swiftness, strength, or beauty, there must be a hundred or more trained
to stand forward and dispute the choice; and those animals rejected do
not lose any of those qualifications because they were not accepted; far
from it; their value is acknowledged, and they quickly find persons
desirous of possessing them. Now, friend," said Father Châtelain, having
fairly talked himself out of breath, "do you not confess that I was
right when I said ours was no common farm, any more than our employer
was no ordinary master?"

"Indeed," said the Schoolmaster, "your account is most interesting, and
fully bears out all you asserted. But, the more I hear of the exalted
views and noble generosity of your master, the more earnestly do I pray
he may be induced to look with pity on my wretched condition. To such a
man, so filled with a desire to improve the condition of God's
creatures, a charitable action more or less would make but little
difference. Oh, tell me beforehand his name, and that of your kind Lady
of the Ready Help, that I may already bless and thank them; for full
certain am I, minds so bent upon good deeds will never turn a deaf ear
to my petition."

"Now I dare say you expect to be told the high-sounding titles of some
great, grand personages. But, bless you! no such thing; no more parade
about their names than those of the saints themselves. 'Our Lady of
Help' is called Madame Georges, and our good master plain M. Rodolph."

"Merciful powers! My wife! my judge! my executioner!" faintly exclaimed
the robber, struck almost speechless at this unexpected revelation.
"Rodolph!--Madame Georges!"

It was wholly impossible for the Schoolmaster to entertain a doubt
respecting the identity of the persons to whom those names belonged.
Previously to adjudging him his fearful punishment, Rodolph had spoken
of the lively interest he took in all that concerned Madame Georges. The
recent visit of the negro David to this farm was another conclusive
proof of there being no mistake in the matter. It seemed as though the
very hand of Providence had brought about this singular rencontre,
overthrowing as it so completely did his recently cherished hopes of
emancipation from his present misery, through the intervention of the
generosity of the proprietor of this farm. To fly was his first impulse.
The very name of Rodolph inspired him with the most intense terror.
Possibly he was even now in the house. Scarcely recovered from his first
alarm, the brigand rose from the table, and, grasping the hand of
Tortillard, exclaimed, in a wild and terrified manner:

"Let us be gone!--quick!--lead me hence. Let us go, I say."

The whole of the servants looked on with astonishment.

"Go!" said Father Châtelain, with much surprise. "Why? Wherefore should
you go? What are you thinking about, my friend? Come, what fresh whim is
this? Are you quite in your right senses?"

Tortillard cleverly availed himself of this last suggestion, and,
uttering a deep sigh, touched his forehead significantly with his
forefinger, so as to convey to the minds of the wondering labourers the
impression that his pretended parent was not quite right in his head.
The signal elicited a corresponding gesture of pity and due
comprehension.

"Come, I say, come!" persisted the Schoolmaster, endeavouring to draw
the boy along with him; but, fully determined not to quit such
comfortable quarters to wander about in the fields all night during the
frost and snow, Tortillard began in a whimpering voice to say:

"Oh, dear! oh, dear! poor father has got one of his old fits come on
again. There, there, father, sit down and keep yourself quiet. Pray do,
and don't think of wandering out in the cold--it would kill you, maybe.
No, not if you are ever so angry with me, will I be so wicked as to lead
you out in such weather." Then, addressing himself to the labourers, he
said, "Will none of you good gentlemen help me to keep my poor dear
father from risking his life by going out to-night?"

"Yes, yes, my boy," answered Father Châtelain; "make yourself perfectly
easy. We will not allow your father to quit the place. He shall stay
here to-night, in spite of himself."

"Surely you will not keep me here against my will?" inquired the
wretched Schoolmaster, in hurried accents; "and perhaps, too, I should
offend your master by my presence--that Monsieur Rodolph. You told me
the farm was not an hospital; once more, therefore, I ask you to let me
go forth in peace on my way."

"Offend our master!--that you would not, I am quite sure. But make
yourself easy on that score. I am sorry to say that he does not live
here, neither do we see him half as frequently as we could wish. But, if
even he had been here, your presence would have made no sort of
difference to him."

"No, no," persisted the blind man with continued alarm; "I have changed
my mind about applying to him. My son is right. No doubt my relation at
Louvres will take care of me. I will go there at once."

"All I have got to say," replied Father Châtelain, kindly conceiving
that he was speaking to a man whose brain was unhappily affected, "is
just this--that to attempt to proceed on your journey with this poor
child to-night is wholly out of the question. Come, let me put matters
to rights for you, and say no more about it."

Although now being reassured of Rodolph's not being at Bouqueval, the
terrors of the Schoolmaster were by no means dissipated; and, spite of
his frightfully disfigured countenance, he was in momentary dread of
being recognized by his wife, who might at any moment enter the kitchen,
when he was perfectly persuaded she would instantly denounce and give
him into custody; his firm impression having been, from the hour of
receiving his horrible punishment from the hands of Rodolph, that it was
done to satisfy the hatred and vengeance of Madame Georges. But, unable
to quit the farm, the ruffian found himself wholly at the mercy of
Tortillard. Resigning himself, therefore, to what was unavoidable, yet
anxious to escape from the eyes of his wife, he said to the venerable
labourer:

"Since you kindly assure me my being here will in no way displease
either your master or mistress, I will gladly accept your hospitality;
but, as I am much fatigued, and must set out again at break of day, I
would humbly ask permission to go at once to my bed."

"Oh, yes, to-morrow morning by all means, and as soon as you like; we
are very early people here. And, for fear even that you should again
wander from the right road, some one shall conduct you part of the way."

"If you have no objection," said Jean René, addressing Father Châtelain,
"I will see the poor man a good step on the road; because Madame Georges
said yesterday I was to take the chaise and go to the lawyer's at
Villiers le Bel to fetch a large sum of money she requires of him."

"Go with the poor blind traveller by all means," replied Father
Châtelain; "but you must walk, mind. Madame has changed her mind about
sending to Villiers del Bel, and, wisely reflecting that it was not
worth while to have so large a sum of money lying useless at the farm,
has determined to let it remain with the lawyer till Monday next, which
will be the day she requires it."

"Of course, Father Châtelain; mistress knows best. But please to tell me
why she should consider it unsafe to have money at the farm. What is she
afraid of?"

"Of nothing, my lad. Thank God, there is no occasion for fear. But, for
all that, I would much rather have five hundred sacks of corn on the
premises than ten bags of crowns. Come," said old Châtelain, addressing
himself to the brigand and Tortillard, "come, follow me, friend; and you
too, my lad." Then, taking up a small lamp, he conducted his two guests
to a chamber on the ground floor, first traversing a large passage into
which several doors opened. Placing the light on a table, the old
labourer said to the Schoolmaster, "Here is your lodging, and may God
grant you a good and peaceful night's repose, my good friend. As for
you, my little man, you are sure to sleep sound and well; it belongs to
your happy age to do so."

The Schoolmaster, pensive and meditative, sat down by the side of the
bed to which Tortillard conducted him. At the instant when Father
Châtelain was quitting the room, Tortillard made him a sign indicative
of his desire to speak with him alone, and hastily rejoined him in the
passage.

"What is it, my boy, you have to say to me?" inquired the old man,
kindly.

"Ah, my kind sir, I only wanted to say that my father is frequently
seized during the night with most violent convulsion-fits, which require
a much stronger person than I am to hold him; should I be obliged to
call for help, is there any person near who could hear me?"

"Poor child!" said the labourer, sympathisingly; "make yourself easy.
There,--do you see that door beside the staircase?"

"Oh, yes, good, kind gentleman; I see it."

"Well, one of the farm labourers sleeps in that room. You will only just
have to run to him. He never locks his door; and he will come to your
father in an instant."

"Thank you, sir; God bless you! I will remember all your kindness when I
say my prayers. But suppose, sir, the man and myself were not strong
enough together to manage my poor father when these violent convulsions
come on, could you, who look so good, and speak so kind--could you be
kind enough to come and tell us what to do?"

"Me, my boy? Oh, I sleep, as well as all the other men servants, out of
the house, in a large outbuilding in the courtyard. But make yourself
quite comfortable. Jean René could manage a mad bull, he is so powerful.
Besides, if you really wished any further help he would go and call up
our old cook; she sleeps on the first floor, even with our mistress and
young mademoiselle, and I can promise you that our old woman is a most
excellent sick-nurse should your father require any one to attend to him
when the fit is over."

"Thank you, kind gentleman, a thousand times. Good-night, sir. I will go
now and pray of God to bless you for your kindness and pity to the poor
blind."

"Good night, my lad! Let us hope both you and your father will enjoy a
sound night's rest, and have no occasion to require any person's help.
You had better return to your room now; your poor father may be wanting
you."

"I will, sir. Good night, and thank you!"

"God preserve you both, my child!" And the old man returned to the
kitchen.

Scarcely had he turned his back than the limping rascal made one of
those supremely insulting and derisive gestures familiar to all the
blackguards of Paris, consisting in slapping the nape of the neck
repeatedly with the left hand, darting the right hand quite open
continually out in a straight line. With the most consummate audacity,
this dangerous child had just gleaned, under the mask of guileless
tenderness and apprehension for his father, information most important
for the furtherance of the schemes of the Chouette and Schoolmaster. He
had ascertained during the last few minutes that the part of the
building where he slept was only occupied by Madame Georges,
Fleur-de-Marie, an old female servant, and one of the farm-labourers.
Upon his return to the room he was to share with the blind man,
Tortillard carefully avoided approaching him. The former, however, heard
his step, and growled out:

"Where have you been, you vagabond?"

"What! you want to know, do you, old blind 'un?"

"Oh, I'll make you pay for all you have made me suffer this evening, you
wretched urchin!" exclaimed the Schoolmaster, rising furiously, and
groping about in every direction after Tortillard, feeling by the walls
as a guide. "I'll strangle you when I catch you, you young fiend--you
infernal viper!"

"Poor, dear father! How prettily he plays at blind-man's buff with his
own little boy," said Tortillard, grinning, and enjoying the ease with
which he escaped from the impotent attempts of the Schoolmaster to seize
him, who, though impelled to the exertion by his overboiling rage, was
soon compelled to cease, and, as had been the case before, to give up
all hopes of inflicting the revenge he yearned to bestow on the impish
son of Bras Rouge.

Thus compelled to submit to the impudent persecution of his juvenile
tormentor, and await the propitious hour when all his injuries could
safely be avenged, the brigand determined to reserve his powerless wrath
for a fitting opportunity of paying off old scores, and, worn out in
body by his futile violence, threw himself, swearing and cursing, on the
bed.

"Dear father!--sweet father!--have you got the toothache that you swear
so? Ah, if Monsieur le Curé heard you, what would he say to you? He
would give you such penance! Oh, my!"

"That's right!--go on!" replied the ruffian, in a hollow and suppressed
voice, after long enduring this entertaining vivacity on the part of the
young gentleman. "Laugh at me!--mock me!--make sport of my calamity,
cowardly scoundrel that you are! That is a fine, noble action, is it
not? Just worthy of such a mean, ignoble, contemptible soul as dwells
within that wretched, crooked body!"

"Oh, how fine we talk! How nice we preach about being generous, and all
that, don't we?" cried Tortillard, bursting into peals of laughter. "I
beg your pardon, dear father, but I can't possibly help thinking it so
funny to hear you, whose fingers were regular fish-hooks, picking and
stealing whatever came in their way; and, as for generosity, I beg you
don't mention it, because, till you got your eyes poked out I don't
suppose you ever thought of such a word!"

"But, at least, I never did you any harm. Why, then, torment me thus?"

"Because, in the first place, you said what I did not like to the
Chouette; then you had a fancy for stopping and playing the fool among
the clodhoppers here. Perhaps you mean to commence a course of asses'
milk?"

"You impudent young beggar! If I had only had the opportunity of
remaining at this farm--which I now wish sunk in the bottomless pit, or
blasted with eternal lightning--you should not have played your tricks
of devilish cruelty with me any longer!"

"You to remain here! that would be a farce! Who, then, would Madame la
Chouette have for her _bête de souffrance_? Me, perhaps, thank
ye!--don't you wish you may get it?"

"Miserable abortion!"

"Abortion! ah, yes, another reason why I say, as well as Aunt Chouette,
there is nothing so funny as to see you in one of your unaccountable
passions--you, who could kill me with one blow of your fist; it's more
funny than if you were a poor, weak creature. How very funny you were at
supper to-night! _Dieu de Dieu!_ what a lark I had all to myself! Why,
it was better than a play at the Gaîté. At every kick I gave you on the
sly, your passion made all the blood fly in your face, and your white
eyes became red all round; they only wanted a bit of blue in the middle
to have been real tri-coloured. They would have made two fine cockades
for the town-sergeant, wouldn't they?"

"Come, come, you like to laugh--you are merry: bah! it's natural at your
age--it's natural--I'm not angry with you," said the Schoolmaster, in an
air of affected carelessness, hoping to propitiate Tortillard; "but,
instead of standing there, saying saucy things, it would be much better
for you to remember what the Chouette told you; you say you are very
fond of her. You should examine all over the place, and get the print of
the locks. Didn't you hear them say they expected to have a large sum of
money here on Monday? We will be amongst them then, and have our share.
I should have been foolish to have stayed here; I should have had enough
of these asses of country people at the end of a week, shouldn't I,
boy?" asked the ruffian, to flatter Tortillard.

"If you had stayed here I should have been very much annoyed, 'pon my
word and honour," replied Bras Rouge's son, in a mocking tone.

"Yes, yes, there's a good business to be done in this house; and, if
there should be nothing to steal, yet I will return here with the
Chouette, if only to have my revenge," said the miscreant, in a tone
full of fury and malice, "for now I am sure it is my wife who excited
that infernal Rodolph against me; he who, in blinding me, has put me at
the mercy of all the world, of the Chouette, and a young blackguard like
yourself. Well, if I cannot avenge myself on him, I will have vengeance
against my wife,--yes, she shall pay me for all, even if I set fire to
this accursed house and bury myself in its smouldering ruins. Yes, I
will--I will have--"

"You will, you want to get hold of your wife, eh, old gentleman? She is
within ten paces of you! that's vexing, ain't it? If I liked, I could
lead you to the door of her room, that's what I could, for I know the
room. I know it--I know it--I know it," added Tortillard, singing
according to his custom.

"You know her room?" said the Schoolmaster, in an agony of fervent joy;
"you know it?"

"I see you coming," said Tortillard; "come, play the pretty, and get on
your hind legs like a dog when they throw him a dainty bone. Now, old
Cupid!"

"You know my wife's chamber?" said the miscreant, turning to the side
whence the sound of Tortillard's voice proceeded.

"Yes, I know it; and, what's still better, only one of the farm servants
sleeps on the side of the house where we are. I know his door--the key
is in it--click, one turn, and he's all safe and fast. Come, get up, old
blind Cupid!"

"Who told you all this?" asked the blind scoundrel, rising
involuntarily.

"Capital, Cupid! By the side of your wife's room sleeps an old cook--one
more turn of the key, and click! we are masters of the house--masters of
your wife, and the young girl with the gray mantle that you must catch
hold of and carry off. Now, then, your paw, old Cupid; do the pretty to
your master directly."

"You lie! you lie! how could you know all this?"

"Why, I'm lame in my leg, but not in my head. Before we left the kitchen
I said to the old guzzling labourer that sometimes in the night you had
convulsions, and I asked him where I could get assistance if you were
attacked. He said if you were attacked I might call up the man servant
and the cook; and he showed me where they slept; one down, the other up
stairs in the first floor, close to your wife--your wife--your wife!"

And Tortillard repeated his monotonous song. After a lengthened silence
the Schoolmaster said to him, in a calm voice, but with an air of
desperate determination:

"Listen, boy. I have stayed long enough. Lately--yes, yes, I confess
it--I had a hope which now makes my lot appear still more frightful; the
prison, the _bagne_, the guillotine, are nothing--nothing to what I have
endured since this morning; and I shall have the same to endure always.
Lead me to my wife's room; I have my knife here; I will kill her. I
shall be killed afterwards; but what of that? My hatred swells till it
chokes me; I shall have revenge, and that will console me. What I now
suffer is too much--too much! for me, too, before whom everybody
trembled. Now, lad, if you knew what I endure, even you would pity me.
Even now my brain appears ready to burst; my pulse beats as if my veins
would burst; my head whirls--"

"A cold in your 'knowledge-box,' old chap--that's it; sneeze--that'll
cure you," said Tortillard, with a loud grin; "what say you to a pinch
of snuff, old brick?"

And striking loudly on the back of his left hand, which was clenched, as
if he were tapping on the lid of a snuff-box, he sang:

      "J'ai du bon tabac dans ma tabatière;
       J'ai du bon tabac, tu n'en auras pas."

"_Oh, mon Dieu! mon Dieu!_ they will drive me mad!" cried the brigand,
becoming really almost demented by a sort of nervous excitement arising
from bloodthirsty revenge and implacable hatred, which in vain sought to
satiate itself. The exuberant strength of this monster could only be
equalled by the impossibility of satisfying his deadly desires. Let us
imagine a hungry, furious, maddened wolf, teased during a whole day by a
child through the bars of his den, and scenting within two paces of him
a victim who would at once satisfy his hunger and his rage. At the last
taunt of Tortillard the brigand almost lost his senses; unable to reach
his victim, he desired in his frenzy to shed his own blood, for his
blood was stifling him. One moment he resolved to kill himself, and, had
he had a loaded pistol in his hand, he would not have hesitated; he
fumbled in his pocket, and drew out a clasp-knife, opened it, and raised
it to strike; but, quick as were his movements, reflection, fear, and
vital instinct were still more rapid,--the murderer lacked courage,--his
arm fell on his knees. Tortillard had watched all his actions with an
attentive eye, and, when he saw the finale of this pseudo-tragedy, he
continued, mockingly,--

"How, boys, a duel? Ah, pluck the chickens!"

The Schoolmaster, fearing that he should lose his senses if he gave way
to an ineffectual burst of fury, turned a deaf ear to this fresh insult
of Tortillard, who so impertinently commented on the cowardice of an
assassin who recoiled from suicide. Despairing of escape from what he
termed, by a sort of avenging fatality, the cruelty of his cursed child,
the ruffian sought to try what could be done by assailing the avarice of
the son of Bras Rouge.

"Ah," said he to him, in a tone almost supplicatory, "lead me to the
door of my wife's room, and take anything you like that's in her room
and run away with it! leave me to myself. You may cry out 'murder' if
you like; they will apprehend me--kill me on the spot--I care not, I
shall die avenged, if I have not the courage to end my existence myself.
Oh, lead me there--lead me there; depend on it she has gold, jewels,
anything, and you may take all, all for yourself, for your own, do you
mind?--your own; only lead me to the door where she is."

"Yes, I mind well enough; you want me to lead you to her door, then to
her bed, and then to tell you when to strike, then to guide your
hand--eh! that's it, ain't it? You want to make me a handle to your
knife, old monster!" replied Tortillard, with an expression of contempt,
anger, and horror, which, for the first time in his life gave an
appearance of seriousness to his weasel face, usually all impertinence
and insolence; "I'll be killed first, I tell you, sooner than I'll lead
you to where your wife is!"

"You refuse?"

The son of Bras Rouge made no reply. He approached with bare feet and
without being heard by the Schoolmaster, who, seated on the bed, still
held his large knife in his hand, and then, in a moment, with marvellous
quickness and dexterity, Tortillard snatched from him his weapon, and
with one jump skipped to the further end of the chamber.

"My knife! my knife!" cried the brigand, extending his arms.

"No; for then you might to-morrow morning ask to speak with your wife
and try to kill her, since, as you say, you have had enough of life, and
are such a coward that you don't dare kill yourself."

"How he defends my wife against me!" said the bandit, whose intellect
became obscure. "This little wretch is a devil! Where am I? Why does he
try to save her?"

"Because I like it," said Tortillard, whose face resumed its usual
appearance of sly impudence.

"Ah, is that it?" murmured the Schoolmaster, whose mind was wandering;
"well, then, I'll fire the house! we'll all burn--all! I prefer that
furnace to the other. The candle! the candle!"

"Ah! ah! ah!" exclaimed Tortillard, bursting out again into loud
laughter. "If your own candle--your 'peepers'--had not been snuffed out,
and for ever, you would have known that ours had been extinguished an
hour ago." And Tortillard sang:

      "Ma chandelle est morte,
        Je n'ai plus de feu."

The Schoolmaster gave a deep groan, stretched out his arms, and fell
heavily on the floor, his face on the ground, and, struck by a rush of
blood, remained motionless.

"Not to be caught, old boy," said Tortillard; "that's only a trick to
make me come to you that you may serve me out! When you have been long
enough on the floor you'll get up."

Bras Rouge's boy resolved not to go to sleep for fear of being surprised
by the Schoolmaster, so seated himself in a chair, with his eyes fixed
on the ruffian, persuaded that it was a trap laid for him, and not
believing the Schoolmaster in any danger. That he might employ himself
agreeably Tortillard drew silently and carefully from his pocket a
little red silk purse, and counted slowly, and with looks of joy and
avarice, the seventeen pieces of gold which it contained. Tortillard had
acquired his ill-gotten riches thus: It may be remembered that Madame
d'Harville was nearly surprised by her husband at the rendezvous which
she had granted to the commandant. Rodolph, when he had given the purse
to the young lady had told her to go up to the fifth story to the
Morels, under the pretence of bringing them assistance. Madame
d'Harville ran quickly up the staircase holding the purse in her hands.
When Tortillard, who was coming from the quack's, caught a glimpse of
the purse, and, pretending to stumble as he passed the marquise, pushed
against her, and, in the shock, slily stole the purse. Madame
d'Harville, bewildered, and hearing her husband's footsteps, hurried on
to the fifth story without thinking or complaining of the impudent
robbery of the little cripple. After having counted and recounted his
gold Tortillard cast his eyes towards the Schoolmaster who was extended
still on the ground. Disquieted for a moment, he listened, and hearing
the robber breathe freely he thought that he was still meditating some
trick against him.

Chance saved the Schoolmaster from a congestion of the brain which else
must have proved mortal. His fall had caused a salutary and abundant
bleeding at the nose. He then fell into kind of a feverish torpor--half
sleep, half delirium, and then had this wild, this fearful dream!




CHAPTER VIII.

THE DREAM.


This was the Schoolmaster's dream:

He was again in Rodolph's house in the Allée des Veuves. The saloon in
which the miscreant had received his appalling punishment had not
undergone any alteration. Rodolph himself was sitting at the table on
which were the Schoolmaster's papers and the little _Saint-Esprit_ of
_lapis_ which he had given to the Chouette. Rodolph's countenance was
grave and sad. On his right the negro David was standing motionless and
silent; on his left was the Chourineur, who looked on with a bewildered
mien. In his dream the Schoolmaster was no longer blind, but saw through
a medium of clear blood, which filled the cavities of his eyeballs. All
and everything seemed to him tinted with red. As birds of prey hover on
motionless wing above the head of the victim which they fascinate before
they devour, so a monstrous screech-owl (_chouette_), having for its
head the hideous visage of the one-eyed hag, soared over the
Schoolmaster, keeping fixed on him her round, glaring, and green eye.
This fixed stare was upon his breast like a heavy weight. The
Schoolmaster discerned a vast lake of blood separating him from the
table at which Rodolph was seated. Then this inflexible judge, as well
as the Chourineur and the negro, grew and grew, expanding into colossal
proportions, until they touched the ceiling; and then it also became
higher in proportion. The lake of blood was calm, and as unruffled as a
red mirror; the Schoolmaster saw his hideous countenance reflected
therein. Then that was suddenly effaced by the tumult of the swelling
waves. From their troubled surface there arose a vapour resembling the
foul exhalation of a marsh, a livid-coloured mist of that violet hue
peculiar to the lips of the dead. In proportion as this miasma
rises--rises, the faces of Rodolph, the Chourineur, and the negro
continue to expand and expand in an extraordinary manner, and always
remain above this fearful cloud. In the midst of the awful vapour, the
Schoolmaster sees the pale ghosts, and those murderous scenes in which
he had been the actor. In this fantastic mirage he first sees a little
bald-headed old man, clad in a long brown coat, and wearing an eye-shade
of green silk. He is employing himself in a dilapidated chamber in
counting and arranging pieces of gold into piles by the light of a lamp.
Through the window, lighted by the dim moonlight reflected on the tops
of some high trees waving in the wind, the Schoolmaster recognises his
own figure. Pressing his distorted features against the glass, following
every motion of the old man with glaring eyes, then breaking a pane, he
opens the window itself, leaps with a bound upon his victim, and stabs
him between the shoulders with his long and keen knife. The movement is
so rapid, the blow so quick and sure, that the dead body of the old man
remains seated in the chair.

The murderer tries to withdraw his weapon from the dead body,--he
cannot! He redoubles his efforts,--in vain! He then seeks to quit the
deadly steel,--impossible!

The hand of the assassin clings to the handle of the poignard, as the
blade of the poignard clings to the frame of the wounded man. The
murderer then hears the sound of clinking spurs and clashing swords in
the adjoining room. He must escape at all risks, and attempts to carry
with him the body of the feeble old man, from which he cannot withdraw
either his weapon or his hand.

He cannot do even this. The light and feeble carcass weighs him down
like a mass of lead. Despite his herculean shoulders, his desperate
efforts, the Schoolmaster cannot even stir this overwhelming weight.

The sound of echoing steps and jingling sabres comes nearer and nearer.
The key turns in the lock,--the door opens. The vision disappears.

And then the screech-owl flaps her wing, and shrieks out:

"It is the old miser of the Rue de la Roule. Your maiden murder! murder!
murder!"

A moment's darkness,--then the miasma which covers the lake of blood
resumes its transparency, and another spectre is revealed.

The day begins to dawn,--the fog is thick and heavy. A man, clothed like
a cattle-dealer, lies stretched, dead on the bank of the highroad. The
trampled earth, the torn turf, proved that the victim had made a
desperate resistance. The man has five bleeding wounds in his breast. He
is lifeless; yet still he seems to whistle on his dogs, calling to them,
"Help! help!"

But his whistling, his cries, proceed from five large and gaping
wounds,--

      "Each one a death in nature,"--

which move like so many complaining lips. The five calls, the five
whistlings, all made and heard at once, come from the dead man by the
mouths of his gushing wounds; and fearful are they to hear!

At this instant the Chouette waves her wings, and mocks the deathly
groans of the victim with five bursts of laughter,--a laughter as
unearthly and as horrible as the madman's mirth; and then again she
shrieks:

"The cattle-dealer of Poissy. Murder! murder! murder!"

Protracted and underground echoes first repeat aloud the malevolent
laughter of the screech-owl. Then they seem to die away in the very
bowels of the earth.

At this sound two large dogs, as black as midnight, with eyes glaring
like burning coals, begin to run rapidly around--around--around the
Schoolmaster, baying furiously. They almost touch him, and yet their
bark appears as distant as if carried on the wind of the morning.

Gradually these spectres fade away as the previous one did, and are lost
in the pale vapour which is continually ascending.

A new exhalation now arises from the lake of blood, and spreads itself
on its surface. It is a sort of greenish, transparent mist; it resembles
the vertical section of a canal filled with water. At first he sees the
bed of the canal covered in by a thick vase formed of numberless
reptiles usually imperceptible to the unassisted eye, but which,
enlarged, as if viewed through a microscope, assume monstrous forms,
vast proportions relatively to their actual size. It is no longer mud,
but a compact, living, crawling mass,--an inextricable conglomeration
which wriggles and curls; so close, so dense, that a sullen and low
undulation hardly stirs the level of this vase, or rather bed of foulest
animalculæ. Above trickles gently--gently, a turbid stream, thick and
stagnating, which, in its dilatory flow, disturbs the filth incessantly
vomited by the sewers of a great city,--fragments of all sorts,
carcasses of animals, etc., etc. Suddenly the Schoolmaster hears the
plash of a body, which falls heavily on the water; in its recoil the
water sprinkles his very face. In the midst of the air-bubbles which
rise thick and fast to the surface of the canal he sees the body of a
woman, which sinks rapidly as she struggles--struggles.

Then he sees himself and the Chouette running hastily along the banks of
St. Martin's Canal, carrying with them a box covered with black cloth;
and yet he is still present during all the variations of agony suffered
by the victim whom he and the Chouette have thrown into the canal. After
the first immersion the victim rises to the surface and moves her arms
in violent agitation like some one who, not knowing how to swim, tries
in vain to save herself. Then she utters a piercing cry,--a cry of one
in the last extremity,--despairing--which ends in the sullen, stifled
sound of involuntary choking; and the woman the second time sinks
beneath the troubled waters.

The screech-owl, which hovers continually motionless, imitates the
convulsive rattle of the drowning wretch, as she mocked the dying groans
of the cattle-dealer. In the midst of bursts of deathlike laughter the
screech-owl utters, "Glou! glou! glou!"

The subterranean echoes repeated the sound.

A second time submerged the woman is fast suffocating, and makes one
more desperate effort for breath; but, instead of air, it is water which
she inspires. Then her head falls back, her convulsed features are
swollen and become livid, her neck becomes blue and tumefied, her arms
stiffen, and, in a last spasmodic effort, the drowning woman in her
agony moves her feet, which are resting on the vase. Then she is
surrounded by a mass of black soil, which ascends with her to the
surface of the water. Scarcely has the choked wretch breathed her last
sigh than she is covered with myriads of the microscopic reptiles,--the
greedy and horrible vermin of the mud. The carcass floats for a moment,
balances for a moment, and then sinks slowly, horizontally, the feet
lower than the head, and between the double waters begins to follow the
current of the land. Sometimes the dead corpse turns, and its pale face
is before the Schoolmaster. Then the spectre fixes on him glaringly its
two blue, glassy, and opaque eyes; the livid mouth opens. The
Schoolmaster is far away from the drowning woman, and yet her lips
murmur in his ears, "Glou! glou! glou!" accompanying these appalling
syllables with that singular noise which a bottle thrust into the water
makes when filling itself.

The screech-owl repeats, "Glou! glou! glou!" flapping her wings, and
shrieking:

"The woman of the Canal St. Martin! Murder! murder! murder!"

The vision of the drowned woman disappears. The lake of blood, through
which the Schoolmaster still constantly beholds Rodolph, becomes of a
bronzed, black colour, then red again, and then changes instantaneously
into a liquid, furnace-like, molten metal. Then that lake of fire
rises--rises--rises towards the sky like an immense whirlpool. There is
now a fiery horizon like iron at a white heat. This immense, boundless
horizon dazzles and scorches the very eyes of the Schoolmaster, who,
fascinated, fastened to the spot, cannot turn away his gaze. Then, at
the bottom of this burning lava, whose reflection seems to consume him,
he sees pass and repass, one by one, the black and giant spectres of his
victims.

"The magic-lanthorn of remorse! remorse! remorse!" shrieks the
night-bird, flapping her hideous wings, and laughing mockingly.

Notwithstanding the intolerable anguish which his impatient gaze
creates, the Schoolmaster has his eyes fixed on the grisly phantoms
which move in the blazing sheet. Then an indefinable horror steals over
him. Passing through every step of indescribable torture, by dint of
contemplating this blazing sight, he feels his eyeballs--which have
replaced the blood with which his orbits were filled at the commencement
of his dream--he feels his eyeballs grow hot, burning, and melt in this
furnace--to smoke and bubble--and at last to become calcined in their
cavities like two crucibles filled with red fire. By a fearful power,
after having seen as well as felt the successive transformations of his
eyeballs into ashes, he falls into the darkness of his actual blindness.

But now, suddenly, his intolerable agonies are assuaged as though by
enchantment. An odorous air of delicious freshness passes over his
burning eyeballs. This air is a lovely admixture of the scents of
springtime, which exhale from flowers bathed in evening dew. The
Schoolmaster hears all about him a gentle murmur, like that of the
breeze which just stirs the leaves--like that of a brook of running
waters, which rushes and murmurs on its bed of stone and moss "in the
leafy month of June." Thousands of birds warble the most enchanting
melodies. They are stilled, and the voices of children, of angelic tone,
sing strange, unknown words--words that are "winged" (if we may use the
expression), and which the Schoolmaster hears mount to heaven with
gentle motion. A feeling of moral health, of tranquillity, of undefined
languor, creeps over him by degrees. It is an expansion of the heart, an
elevation of the mind, an effort of the soul, of which no physical
feeling, how delicious soever it may be, can impart the least idea. He
feels himself softly soaring in a heavenly sphere; he seems to rise to
an immeasurable height.

       ·   ·   ·   ·   ·   ·   ·   ·   ·   ·   ·   ·   ·   ·   ·

After having for some moments revelled in this unspeakable felicity he
again finds himself in the dark abyss of his habitual thoughts. His
dream continues; but he is again but the muzzled miscreant who
blasphemes and curses in the paroxysm of his impotent rage. A voice is
heard--sonorous--solemn. It is Rodolph's. The Schoolmaster starts "like
a guilty thing upon a fearful summons." He has the vague consciousness
of a dream; but the alarm with which Rodolph inspires him is so great
that he tries, but vainly, to escape from this fresh vision. The voice
speaks--he listens. The tone of Rodolph is not severe; it is "rather in
sorrow than in anger."

"Unhappy man," he says to the Schoolmaster, "the hour of your repentance
has not yet sounded. God only knows when it will strike. The punishment
of your crimes is still incomplete; you have suffered, but not expiated.
Destiny follows out its work of full justice. Your accomplices have
become your tormentors. A woman, a child, tame, subdue, conquer you.
When I sentenced you to a terrible punishment for your crimes I said--do
you remember my words?--'You have wickedly abused the great bodily
strength bestowed upon you; I will paralyse that strength. The strongest
have trembled before you; I will make you henceforward shrink in the
presence of the weakest of beings.' You have left the obscure retreat in
which you might have dwelt for repentance and expiation. You were afraid
of silence and solitude. You sought to drown remembrance by new crimes.
Just now, in a fearful and bloodthirsty access of passion, you have
wished to kill your wife. She is here under the same roof as yourself.
She sleeps without defence. You have a knife. Her apartment is close at
hand. There was nothing to prevent you from reaching her. Nothing could
have protected her from your rage--nothing but your impotence. The dream
you have had, and in which you are still bound, may teach you much, may
save you. The mysterious phantoms of this dream bear with them a most
pregnant meaning. The lake of blood, in which your victims have
appeared, is the blood you have shed. The molten lava which replaced it
is the gnawing, eating remorse, which must consume you before one day,
that the Almighty, having mercy on your protracted tortures, shall call
you to himself, and let you taste the ineffable sweetness of his
gracious forgiveness. But this will not be. No, no! these warnings will
be useless. Far from repenting, you regret every day, with horrid
blasphemies, the time when you could commit such atrocities. Alas! from
this continual struggle between your bloodthirsty desires and the
impossibility of satisfying them,--between your habits of fierce
oppression and the compulsion of submitting to beings as weak as they
are depraved,--there will result to you a fate so fearful, so appalling.
Ah, unhappy wretch!"

Rodolph's voice faltered, and for a moment he was silent, as if emotion
and horror had hindered him from proceeding. The Schoolmaster's hair
bristled on his brow. What could be--would be--that fate, which even his
executioner pitied?

"The fate that awaits you is so horrible," resumed Rodolph, "that, if
the Almighty, in his inexorable and all-powerful vengeance, would make
you in your person expiate all the crimes of all mankind, he could not
devise a more fearful punishment! Ah, woe for you! woe for you!"

At this moment the Schoolmaster uttered a piercing shriek, and awoke
with a bound at this horrid, frightful dream.




CHAPTER IX.

THE LETTER.


The hour of nine had struck on the Bouqueval clock, when Madame Georges
softly entered the chamber of Fleur-de-Marie. The light slumber of the
young girl was quickly broken, and she awoke to find her kind friend
standing by her bedside. A brilliant winter's sun darted its rays
through the blinds and chintz window-curtains, the pink linings of which
cast a bright glow on the pale countenance of La Goualeuse, giving it
the look of health it so greatly needed.

"Well, my child," said Madame Georges, sitting down and gently kissing
her forehead, "how are you this morning?"

"Much better, madame, I thank you."

"I hope you were not awoke very early this morning?"

"No, indeed, madame."

"I am glad of it; the blind man and his son, who were permitted to sleep
here last night, insisted upon quitting the farm immediately it was
light, and I was fearful that the noise made in opening the gates might
have woke you."

"Poor things! why did they go so very early?"

"I know not. After you became more calm and comfortable last night, I
went down into the kitchen for the purpose of seeing them, but they had
pleaded extreme weariness, and begged permission to retire. Father
Châtelain tells me the blind man does not seem very right in his head;
and the whole body of servants were unanimous in praising the tenderness
and care with which the boy attended upon his blind parent. But now, my
dear Marie, listen to me; you must not expose yourself to the risk of
taking fresh cold after the attack of fever you suffered from last
night, and, therefore, I recommend your keeping quite quiet all day, and
not leaving the parlour at all."

"Nay, madame, I have promised M. le Curé to be at the rectory at five
o'clock; pray allow me to go, as I am expected."

"Indeed I cannot, it would be very imprudent; I can perceive you have
passed a very bad night, your eyes are quite heavy."

"I have not been able to rest through the most frightful dreams which
pursued me whenever I tried to sleep. I fancied myself in the power of a
wicked woman who used to torment me most cruelly when I was a child; and
I kept starting up in dread and alarm. I am ashamed of such silly
weakness as to allow dreams to frighten me, but, indeed, I suffered so
much during the night that when I awoke my pillow was wetted with my
tears."

"I am truly sorry for this weakness, as you justly style it, my dear
child," said Madame Georges, with affectionate concern, seeing the eyes
of Fleur-de-Marie again filling fast, "because I perceive the pain it
occasions you."

The poor girl, overpowered by her feelings, threw her arms around the
neck of her adopted mother and buried her sobs in her bosom.

"Marie, Marie! my child, you terrify me; why, why is this?"

"Pardon me, dear madame, I beseech you! Indeed, I know not myself what
has come over me, but for the last two days my heart has seemed full
almost to bursting. I cannot restrain my tears, though I know not
wherefore I weep. A fearful dread of some great evil about to befall me
weighs down my spirits and resists every attempt to shake it off."

"Come! come! I shall scold you in earnest if you thus give way to
imaginary terrors."

At this moment Claudine, whose previous tap at the door had been
unheard, entered the room.

"What is it, Claudine?"

"Madame, Pierre has just arrived from Arnouville, in Madame Dubreuil's
chaise; he brings a letter for you which he says is of great
importance."

Madame Georges took the paper from Claudine's hand, opened it and read
as follows:

    "MY DEAR MADAME GEORGES:

      "You could do me a considerable favour, and assist me under very
    perplexing circumstances, by hastening to the farm here without
    delay. Pierre has orders to wait till you are ready, and will
    drive you back after dinner. I really am in such confusion that I
    hardly know what I am about. M. Dubreuil has gone to the
    wool-fair at Pontoise; I have, therefore, no one to turn to for
    advice and assistance but you and Marie. Clara sends her best
    love to her very dear adopted sister, and anxiously expects her
    arrival. Try to be with us by eleven o'clock, to luncheon.

                          "Ever yours most sincerely,
                                                "F. DUBREUIL."

"What can possibly be the matter?" asked Madame Georges of
Fleur-de-Marie; "fortunately the tone of Madame Dubreuil's letter is not
calculated to cause alarm."

"Do you wish me to accompany you, madame?" asked the Goualeuse.

"Why, that would scarcely be prudent, so cold as it is. But, upon second
thoughts," continued Madame Georges, "I think you may venture if you
wrap yourself up very warm; it will serve to raise your spirits, and
possibly the short ride may do you good."

The Goualeuse did not immediately reply, but, after a few minutes'
consideration, she ventured to say:

"But, madame, M. le Curé expects me this evening, at five o'clock, at
the rectory."

"But I promise you to be back in good time for you to keep your
engagement; now will you go?"

"Oh, thank you, madame! Indeed, I shall be so delighted to see Mlle.
Clara."

"What! again?" uttered Madame Georges, in a tone of gentle reproach.
"Mlle. Clara? She does not speak so distantly to you when she addresses
you."

"Oh, no, madame!" replied the poor girl, casting down her eyes, while a
bright flush rose even to her temples; "but there is so great a
difference between us that--"

"Dear Marie! you are cruel and unkind thus needlessly to torment
yourself. Have you so soon forgotten how I chided you but just now for
the very same fault? There, drive away all such foolish thoughts! dress
yourself as quickly as you can, and pray wrap up very carefully. If we
are quick, we may reach Arnouville before eleven o'clock."

Then, leaving Fleur-de-Marie to perform the duties of her simple toilet,
Madame Georges retired to her own chamber, first dismissing Claudine
with an intimation to Pierre that herself and niece would be ready to
start almost immediately.

Half an hour afterwards, Madame Georges and Marie were on their way to
Arnouville, in one of those large, roomy cabriolets, in use among the
rich farmers in the environs of Paris; and briskly did their comfortable
vehicle, drawn by a stout Norman horse, roll over the grassy road which
led from Bouqueval to Arnouville. The extensive buildings and numerous
appendages to the farm, tenanted by M. Dubreuil in the latter village,
bore testimony to the wealth and importance of the property bestowed as
a marriage-portion on Mlle. Césarine de Noirmont upon her union with the
Duke de Lucenay.

The loud crack of Pierre's whip apprised Madame Dubreuil of the arrival
of her friend, Madame Georges, with Fleur-de-Marie, who were most
affectionately greeted by Clara and her mother. Madame Dubreuil was a
good-looking woman of middle age, with a countenance expressive of
extreme gentleness and kindness; while her daughter Clara was a handsome
brunette, with rich hazel eyes, and a happy, innocent expression for
ever resting on her full, rosy lips, which seemed never to open but to
utter words of sweetness and amiability. As Clara eagerly threw her arms
around her friend's neck as she descended the vehicle, the Goualeuse saw
with extreme surprise that the kind-hearted girl had laid aside her more
fashionable attire, and was habited as a simple country maiden.

"Why, Clara!" said Madame Georges, affectionately returning her embrace,
"what is the meaning of this strange costume?"

"It is done in imitation and admiration of her sister Marie," answered
Madame Dubreuil; "I assure you she let me have no peace till I had
procured her a woollen bodice, and a fustian skirt exactly resembling
your Marie's. But, now we are talking of whims and caprices, just come
this way with me," added Madame Dubreuil, drawing a deep sigh, "while I
explain to you my present difficulty, as well as the cause of my so
abruptly summoning you hither; but you are so kind, I feel assured you
will not only forgive it, but also render me all the assistance I
require."

Following Madame Georges and her mother to their sitting-room, Clara
lovingly conducted the Goualeuse also thither, placing her in the
warmest corner of the fireside, and tenderly chafing her hands to
prevent the cold from affecting her; then fondly caressing her, and
styling her again and again her very dear sister Marie, she playfully
reproached her for allowing so long an interval to pass away without
paying her a visit. After the recent conversation which passed between
the poor Goualeuse and the curé (no doubt fresh in the reader's
memory), it will easily be believed that these tender marks of affection
inspired the unfortunate girl with feelings of deep humility, combined
with a timid joy.

"Now, then, dear Madame Dubreuil," said Madame Georges, when they were
comfortably seated, "do pray tell me what has happened, and in what
manner I can be serviceable to you."

"Oh, in several ways! I will tell you exactly how. In the first place, I
believe you are not aware that this farm is the private property of the
Duchesse de Lucenay, and that we are accountable to her alone, having
nothing whatever to do with the duke or his steward."

"No, indeed, I never heard that before."

"Neither should I have troubled you with so unimportant a matter now,
but that it forms a necessary part of the explanation I am about to give
you of my present pressing need of your kind services. You must know,
then, that we consider ourselves as the tenants of Madame de Lucenay,
and always pay our rent either to herself or to Madame Simon, her head
_femme de chambre_; and, really, spite of some little impetuosity of
temper, Madame la Duchesse is so amiable that it is delightful to have
business with her. Dubreuil and I would go through fire and water to
serve her: but, la! that is only natural, considering we have known her
from her very cradle, and were accustomed to see her playing about as a
child during the visits she used annually to pay to the estate during
the lifetime of her late father, the Prince de Noirmont. Latterly she
has asked for her rent in advance. Forty thousand francs is not 'picked
up by the roadside,' as the old proverb says; but happily we had laid
that sum by as Clara's dowry, and the very next morning after the
request reached us we carried madame her money in bright, shining,
golden louis. These great ladies spend so much, you see, in luxuries
such as you and I have no idea of. Yet it is only within the last
twelvemonth Madame de Lucenay has wished to be paid beforehand, she used
always to seem as though she had plenty of money; but things are very
different now."

"Still, my dear Madame Dubreuil, I do not yet perceive in what way I can
possibly assist you."

"Don't be in a hurry! I am just coming to that part of my story; but I
was obliged to tell you all this that you might be able to understand
the entire confidence Madame la Duchesse places in us. To be sure, she
showed her great regard for us by becoming, when only thirteen years of
age, Clara's godmother, her noble father standing as the other sponsor;
and, ever since, Madame de Lucenay has loaded her godchild with presents
and kind attentions. But I must not keep you--I see you are impatient;
so I will at once proceed with the business part of my tale. You must
know, then, that last night I received by express the following letter
from Madame de Lucenay:

    "MY DEAR MADAME DUBREUIL:

      "'You must prepare the small pavilion in the orchard for
    occupation by to-morrow evening. Send there all the requisite
    furniture, such as carpets, curtains, etc., etc. Let nothing be
    wanted to render it, in every respect, as _comfortable_ as
    possible.'

"Do you mark the word 'comfortable,' Madame Georges?" inquired Madame
Dubreuil, pausing in the midst of her reading; "it is even underlined."
Then looking up at her friend with a thoughtful, puzzled expression of
countenance, and receiving no answer, she continued the perusal of her
letter:

      "'It is so long since the pavilion has been used that it will
    require large and constant fires both night and day to remove the
    dampness from the walls. I wish you to behave in every respect to
    the person who will occupy the apartments as you would do to
    myself. And you will receive by the hands of the new visitant a
    letter from me explanatory of all I expect from your well-known
    zeal and attachment. I depend entirely on you and feel every
    assurance that I may safely reckon on your fidelity and desire to
    serve me. Adieu, my dear Madame Dubreuil; remember me most kindly
    to my pretty goddaughter; and believe me ever,

                        "'Yours, sincerely and truly,
                                        "'NOIRMONT DE LUCENAY.

      "'P.S. The person whom I so strongly recommend to your best care
    and attention will arrive the day after to-morrow, about dusk.
    Pray do your very utmost to render the pavilion as _comfortable_
    as you possibly can.'

"Comfortable again, you see, and underlined as before," said Madame
Dubreuil, returning the letter of Madame de Lucenay to her pocket.

"Well," replied Madame Georges, "all this is simple enough!"

"How do you mean, simple enough? you cannot have heard me read the
letter. Madame la Duchesse wishes particularly 'that the pavilion should
be rendered as comfortable as possible.' Now that is the very reason of
my asking you to come to me to-day; Clara and I have been knocking our
heads together in vain to discover what 'comfortable' can possibly mean,
but without being able to find it out. Yet it seems odd, too, that Clara
should not know its meaning, for she was several years at school at
Villiers le Bel, and gained a quantity of prizes for history and
geography; however, she knows as little as I do about that outlandish
word. I dare say it is only known at court, or in the fashionable world.
However, be that as it may, Madame la Duchesse has thrown me into a
pretty fuss by making use of it; she says, and you see twice repeats the
words, and even underlines it, 'that she requests I will furnish the
pavilion as comfortably as possible.' Now what are we to do when we have
not the slightest notion of the meaning of that word?"

"Well, heaven be praised, then, that I can relieve your perplexity by
solving this grand mystery!" said Madame Georges, smiling. "Upon the
present occasion the word comfortable merely means an assemblage of
neat, well-chosen, well-arranged, and convenient furniture, so placed,
in apartments well warmed and protected from cold or damp, that the
occupant shall find every thing that is necessary combined with articles
that to some might seem superfluities."

"Thank you. I perfectly understand what comfortable means as regards
furnishing apartments; but your explanation only increases my
difficulties."

"How so?"

"Madame la Duchesse speaks of carpets, furniture, and many _et
coeteras_; now we have no carpets here, and our furniture is of the
most homely description. Neither can I make out by the letter whether
the person I am to expect is a male or female; and yet every thing must
be prepared by to-morrow evening. What shall I do? What can I do? I can
get nothing here. Really, Madame Georges, it is enough to drive one wild
to be placed in such an awkward situation."

"But, mother," said Clara, "suppose you take the furniture out of my
room, and whilst you are refurnishing it I will go and pass a few days
with dear Marie at Bouqueval."

"My dear child, what nonsense you talk! as if the humble fittings-up of
your chamber could equal what Madame la Duchesse means by the word
'comfortable,'" returned Madame Dubreuil, with a disconsolate shrug of
the shoulders. "Lord! Lord! why will fine ladies puzzle poor folks like
me by going out of their way to find such expressions as comfortable?"

"Then I presume the pavilion in question is ordinarily uninhabited?"
said Madame Georges.

"Oh, yes! There, you see that small white building at the end of the
orchard--that is it. The late Prince de Noirmont, father of Madame la
Duchesse, caused it to be built for his daughter when, in her youthful
days, she was accustomed to visit the farm, and she then occupied it.
There are three pretty chambers in it, and a beautiful little Swiss
dairy at the end of the garden, where, in her childish days, Madame la
Duchesse used to divert herself with feigning to manage. Since her
marriage, she has only been twice at the farm, but each time she passed
several hours in the pavilion. The first time was about six years ago,
and then she came on horseback with--" Then, as though the presence of
Clara and Fleur-de-Marie prevented her from saying more, Madame Dubreuil
interrupted herself by saying, "But I am talking instead of doing; and
that is not the way to get out of my present difficulty. Come, dear,
good Madame Georges, and help a poor bewildered creature like myself!"

"In the first place," answered Madame Georges, "tell me how is this
pavilion furnished at the present moment."

"Oh, scarcely at all! In the principal apartment there is a straw
matting on the centre of the floor; a sofa, and a few arm-chairs
composed of rushes, a table, and some chairs, comprise all the
inventory, which, I think you will allow, falls far short of the word
comfortable."

"Well, I tell you what I should do in your place. Let me see; it is
eleven o'clock. I should send a person on whom you can depend to Paris."

"Our overseer![2] There cannot be a more active, intelligent person."

  [2] A species of overseer employed in most of the large farming
  establishments in the environs of Paris.

"Exactly! just the right sort of messenger. Well, in two hours at the
utmost, he may be in Paris. Let him go to some upholsterer in the
Chaussée d'Antin--never mind which--and give him the list I will draw
out, after I have seen what is wanting for the pavilion; and let him be
directed to say that, let the expense be what it may--"

"I don't care about expense, if I can but satisfy the duchess."

"The upholsterer, then, must be told that, at any cost, he must see that
every article named in the list be sent here either this evening or
before daybreak to-morrow, with three or four of his most clever and
active workmen to arrange them as quickly as possible."

"They might come by the Gonesse diligence, which leaves Paris at eight
o'clock every evening."

"And as they would only have to place the furniture, lay down carpets,
and put up curtains, all that could easily be done by to-morrow
evening."

"Oh, my dear Madame Georges, what a load you have taken off my mind! I
should never have thought of this simple yet proper manner of
proceeding. You are the saving of me! Now, may I ask you to be so kind
as to draw me out the list of articles necessary to render the
pavilion--what is that hard word? I never can recollect it."

"Comfortable! Yes, I will at once set about it, and with pleasure."

"Dear me! here is another difficulty. Don't you see we are not told
whether to expect a lady or a gentleman? Madame de Lucenay, in her
letter, only says 'a person.' It is very perplexing, isn't it?"

"Then make your preparations as if for a lady, my dear Madame Dubreuil;
and, should it turn out a gentleman, why he will only have better reason
to be pleased with his accommodations."

"Quite right; right again, as you always are."

A servant here announced that breakfast was ready.

"Let breakfast wait a little," said Madame Georges. "And, while I draw
out the necessary list, send some person you can depend upon to take the
exact height and width of the three rooms, that the curtains and carpets
may more easily be prepared."

"Thank you. I will set our overseer to work out this commission."

"Madame," continued the servant, speaking to her mistress, "the new
dairy-woman from Stains is here with her few goods in a small cart drawn
by a donkey. The beast has not a heavy load to complain of, for the poor
body's luggage seems but very trifling."

"Poor woman!" said Madame Dubreuil, kindly.

"What woman is it?" inquired Madame Georges.

"A poor creature from Stains, who once had four cows of her own, and
used to go every morning to Paris to sell her milk. Her husband was a
blacksmith, and one day accompanied her to Paris to purchase some iron
he required for his work, agreeing to rejoin her at the corner of the
street where she was accustomed to sell her milk. Unhappily, as it
afterwards turned out, the poor woman had selected a very bad part of
Paris; for, when her husband returned, he found her in the midst of a
set of wicked, drunken fellows, who had, for mere mischief's sake, upset
all her milk into the gutter. The poor blacksmith tried to reason with
them upon the score of their unfair conduct, but that only made matters
worse; they all fell on the husband, who sought in vain to defend
himself from their violence. The end of the story is, that, in the
scuffle which ensued, the man received a stab with a knife, which
stretched him a corpse before the eyes of his distracted wife."

"Dreadful, indeed!" ejaculated Madame Georges. "But, at least, the
murderer was apprehended?"

"Alas, no! He managed to make his escape during the confusion which
ensued, though the unfortunate widow asserts she should recognise him at
any minute she might meet him, having repeatedly seen him in company
with his associates, inhabitants of that neighbourhood. However, up to
the present hour all attempts to discover him have been useless. But, to
end my tale, I must tell you that, in consequence of the death of her
husband, the poor widow was compelled, in order to pay various debts he
had contracted, to sell not only her cows but some little land he
possessed. The bailiff of the château at Stains recommended the poor
creature to me as a most excellent and honest woman, as deserving as she
was unfortunate, having three children to provide for, the eldest not
yet twelve years of age. I happened, just then, to be in want of a
first-rate dairy-woman, therefore offered her the place, which she
gladly accepted, and she has now come to take up her abode on the farm."

"This act of real kindness on your part, my dear Madame Dubreuil, does
not surprise me, knowing you as well as I do."

"Here, Clara," said Madame Dubreuil, as though seeking to escape from
the praises of her friend, "will you go and show this good woman the way
to the lodge she is to occupy, while I hasten to explain to our overseer
the necessity for his immediate departure for Paris?"

"Willingly, dear mother! Marie can come with me, can she not?"

"Of course," answered Madame Dubreuil, "if she pleases." Then added,
smilingly, "I wonder whether you two girls could do one without the
other!"

"And now," said Madame Georges, seating herself before a table, "I will
at once begin my part of the business, that no time may be lost; for we
must positively return to Bouqueval at four o'clock."

"Dear me!" exclaimed Madame Dubreuil; "how early! Why, what makes you in
such a hurry?"

"Marie is obliged to be at the rectory by five o'clock."

"Oh, if her return relates to that good Abbé Laporte, I am sure it is a
sacred duty with which I would not interfere for the world. Well, then,
I will go and give the necessary orders for everything being punctual
to that hour. Those two girls have so much to say to each other that we
must give them as much time as we can."

"Then we shall leave you at three o'clock, my dear Madame Dubreuil?"

"Yes; I promise not to detain you since you so positively wish it. But
pray let me thank you again and again for coming. What a good thing it
was I thought of sending to ask your kind assistance," rejoined Madame
Dubreuil. "Now then, Clara and Marie, off with you!"

As Madame Georges settled herself to her writing, Madame Dubreuil
quitted the room by a door on one side, while the young friends, in
company with the servant who had announced the arrival of the milkwoman
from Stains, went out by the opposite side.

"Where is the poor woman?" inquired Clara.

"There she is, mademoiselle, in the courtyard, near the barns, with her
children and her little donkey-cart."

"You shall see her, dear Marie," said Clara, taking the arm of la
Goualeuse. "Poor woman! she looks so pale and sad in her deep widow's
mourning. The last time she came here to arrange with my mother about
the place she made my heart ache. She wept bitterly as she spoke of her
husband; then suddenly burst into a fit of rage as she mentioned his
murderer. Really, she quite frightened me, she looked so desperate and
full of fury. But, after all, her resentment was natural. Poor thing! I
am sure I pity her; some people are very unfortunate, are they not,
Marie?"

"Alas, yes, they are, indeed!" replied the Goualeuse, sighing deeply.
"There are some persons who appear born only to trouble and sorrow, as
you justly observe, Miss Clara."

"This is really very unkind of you, Marie," said Clara, colouring with
impatience and displeasure. "This is the second time to-day you have
called me 'Miss Clara.' What can I have possibly done to offend you?
For I am sure you must be angry with me, or you would not do what you
know vexes me so very much."

"How is it possible that you could ever offend me?"

"Then why do you say 'miss?' You know very well that both Madame Georges
and my mother have scolded you for doing it. And I give you due warning,
if ever you repeat this great offence, I will have you well scolded
again. Now then, will you be good or not? Speak!"

"Dear Clara, pray pardon me! Indeed, I was not thinking when I spoke."

"Not thinking!" repeated Clara, sorrowfully. "What, after eight long
days' absence you cannot give me your attention even for five minutes?
Not thinking! That would be bad enough; but that is not it, Marie. And I
tell you what, it is my belief you are too proud to own so humble a
friend as myself."

Fleur-de-Marie made no answer, but her whole countenance assumed the
pallor of death.

A woman, dressed as a widow, and in deep mourning, had just caught sight
of her, and uttered a cry of rage and horror which seemed to freeze the
poor girl's blood. This woman was the person who supplied the Goualeuse
with her daily milk, during the time the latter dwelt with the ogress at
the _tapis-franc_.

The scene which ensued took place in one of the yards belonging to the
farm, in the presence of all the labourers, both male and female, who
chanced just then to be returning to the house to take their mid-day
meal. Beneath a shed stood a small cart, drawn by a donkey, and
containing the few household possessions of the widow; a boy of about
twelve years of age, aided by two younger children, was beginning to
unload the vehicle. The milk-woman herself was a woman of about forty
years of age, her countenance coarse, masculine, and expressive of
great resolution. She was, as we before stated, attired in the deepest
mourning, and her eyelids looked red and inflamed with recent weeping.
Her first impulse at the sight of the Goualeuse had been terror; but
quickly did that feeling change into grief and rage, while the most
violent anger contracted her features. Rapidly darting towards the
unhappy girl, she seized her by the arm, and, presenting her to the gaze
of the farm servants, she exclaimed:

"Here is a creature who is acquainted with the assassin of my poor
husband! I have seen her more than twenty times speaking to the ruffian
when I was selling my milk at the corner of the Rue de la
Vieille-Draperie; she used to come to buy a ha'porth every morning. She
knows well enough who it was struck the blow that made me a widow, and
my poor children fatherless. 'Birds of a feather flock together,' and
such loose characters as she is are sure to be linked in with thieves
and murderers. Oh, you shall not escape me, you abandoned wretch!" cried
the milk-woman, who had now lashed herself into a perfect fury, and who,
seeing poor Fleur-de-Marie confused and terror-stricken at this sudden
attack, endeavouring to escape from it by flight, grasped her fiercely
by the other arm also. Clara, almost speechless with surprise and alarm
at this outrageous conduct, had been quite incapable of interfering; but
this increased violence on the part of the widow seemed to restore her
to herself, and angrily addressing the woman she said:

"What is the meaning of this improper behaviour? Are you out of your
senses? Has grief turned your brain? Good woman, I pity you! But let us
pass on; you are mistaken."

"Mistaken!" repeated the woman, with a bitter smile. "Me mistaken! No,
no, there is no mistake! Just look at her pale, guilty looks! Hark how
her very teeth rattle in her head! Ah, she knows well enough there is
no mistake! Ah, you may hold your wicked tongue if you like, but
justice will find a way to make you speak. You shall go with me before
the mayor; do you hear? Oh, it is not worth while resisting! I have good
strong wrists; I can hold you. And sooner than you should escape I would
carry you every step of the way."

"You good-for-nothing, insolent woman! How dare you presume to speak in
this way to my dear friend and sister?"

"Your sister, Mlle. Clara! Believe me, it is you who are deceived--it is
you who have lost your senses," bawled the enraged milk-woman, in a
loud, coarse voice. "Your sister! A likely story a girl out of the
streets, who was the companion of the very lowest wretches in the worst
part of the Cité, should be a sister of yours!"

At these words the assembled labourers, who naturally enough took that
part in the affair which concerned a person of their own class, and who
really sympathised with the bereaved milk-woman, gave utterance to deep,
threatening words, in which the name of Fleur-de-Marie was angrily
mingled. The three children, hearing their mother speaking in a loud
tone, and fearing they knew not what, ran to her, and, clinging to her
dress, burst out into a loud fit of weeping. The sight of these poor
little fatherless things, dressed also in deep mourning, increased the
pity of the spectators for the unfortunate widow, while it redoubled
their indignation against Fleur-de-Marie; while Clara, completely
frightened by these demonstrations of approaching violence, exclaimed,
in an agitated tone, to a group of farm labourers:

"Take this woman off the premises directly! Do you not perceive grief
has driven her out of her senses? Marie! dear Marie! never mind what she
says. She is mad, poor creature, and knows not what she does!"

The poor Goualeuse, pale, exhausted, and almost fainting, made no effort
to escape from the powerful grasp of the incensed milk-woman; she hung
her head, as though unable or unwilling to meet the gaze of friend or
foe. Clara, attributing her condition to the terror excited by so
alarming a scene, renewed her commands to the labourers, "Did you not
hear me desire that this mad woman might be instantly taken away from
the farm? However, unless she immediately ceases her rude and insolent
language, I can promise her, by way of punishment, she shall neither
have the situation my mother promised her nor ever be suffered to put
her foot on the premises again."

Not a person stirred to obey Clara's orders; on the contrary, one of the
boldest among the party exclaimed:

"Well, but, Miss Clara, if your friend there is only a common girl out
of the streets, and, as such, acquainted with the murderer of this poor
woman's husband, surely she ought to go before the mayor to give an
account of herself and her bad companions!"

"I tell you," repeated Clara, with indignant warmth, and addressing the
milk-woman, "you shall never enter this farm again unless you this very
instant, and before all these people, humbly beg pardon of Mlle. Marie
for all the wicked things you have been saying about her!"

"You turn me off the premises then, mademoiselle, do you?" retorted the
widow with bitterness. "Well, so be it. Come, my poor children, let us
put the things back in the cart, and go and seek our bread elsewhere.
God will take care of us. But, at least, when we go, we will take this
abandoned young woman with us. She shall be made to tell the mayor, if
she won't us, who it was that took away your dear father's life; for she
knows well enough--she who was the daily companion of the worst set of
ruffians who infest Paris. And you, miss," added she, looking spitefully
and insolently at Clara, "you should not, because you choose to make
friends with low girls out of the streets, and because you happen to be
rich, be quite so hard-hearted and unfeeling to poor creatures like
me!"

"No more she ought," exclaimed one of the labourers; "the poor woman is
right!"

"Of course she is,--she is only standing up for her own!"

"Poor thing, she has no one now to do so for her! Why, they have
murdered her husband among them! I should think that might content them,
without trampling the poor woman under foot."

"One comfort is, nobody can stop her from doing all in her power to
bring the murderers of her husband to justice."

"It is a shame to send her away in this manner, like a dog!"

"Can she help it, poor creature, if Miss Clara thinks proper to take up
with common girls and thieves, and make them her companions?"

"Infamous to turn an honest woman, a poor widow with helpless children,
into the streets for such a base girl as that!"

These different speeches, uttered nearly simultaneously by the
surrounding crowd, were rapidly assuming a most hostile and threatening
tone, when Clara joyfully exclaimed:

"Thank God, here comes my mother!"

It was, indeed, Madame Dubreuil, who was crossing the courtyard on her
return from the pavilion.

"Now, then, my children," said Madame Dubreuil, gaily approaching the
assembled group, "will you come in to breakfast? I declare it is quite
late! I dare say you are both hungry? Come, Marie!--Clara!"

"Mother," cried Clara, pointing to the widow, "you are fortunately just
in time to save my dear sister Marie from the insults and violence of
that woman. Oh, pray order her away instantly! If you only knew what she
had the audacity to say to Marie!"

"Impossible, Clara!"

"Nay, but, dear mother, only look at my poor dear sister! See how she
trembles! She can scarcely support herself. Oh, it is a shame and
disgrace such conduct should ever have been offered to a guest of ours!
My dear, dear friend--Marie, dear!--look up, and say you are not angry
with us. Pray tell me you will try and forget it!"

"What is the meaning of all this?" inquired Madame Dubreuil, looking
around her with a disturbed and uneasy look, after having observed the
despairing agony of the Goualeuse.

"Ah, now we shall have justice done the poor widow woman!" murmured the
labourers. "Madame will see her righted, no doubt about it!"

"Now, then," exclaimed the milk-woman, exultingly, "here is Madame
Dubreuil. Now, my fine miss," continued she, addressing Fleur-de-Marie,
"you will have your turn of being turned out-of-doors!"

"Is it true, then," cried Madame Dubreuil, addressing the widow, who
still kept firm hold of Fleur-de-Marie's arm, "that you have dared to
insult my daughter's friend, as she asserts? Is this the way you show
your gratitude for all I have done to serve you? Will you leave that
young lady alone?"

"Yes, madame," replied the woman, relinquishing her grasp of
Fleur-de-Marie, "at your bidding I will; for I respect you too much to
disobey you. And, besides, I owe you much gratitude for all your
kindness to a poor, friendless creature like myself. But, before you
blame me, and drive me off the premises with my poor children, just
question that wretched creature that has caused all this confusion what
she knows of me. I know a pretty deal more of her than is to her
credit!"

"For Heaven's sake, Marie," exclaimed Madame Dubreuil, almost petrified
with astonishment, "What does this woman allude to? Do you hear what she
says?"

"Are you, or are you not known by the name of the Goualeuse?" said the
milk-woman to Marie.

"Yes," said the wretched girl, in a low, trembling voice, and without
venturing to lift up her eyes towards Madame Dubreuil,--"yes, I am
called so."

"There you see!" vociferated the enraged labourers. "She owns it! she
owns it!"

"What does she own?" inquired Madame Dubreuil, half frightened at the
assent given by Fleur-de-Marie.

"Leave her to me, madame," resumed the widow, "and you shall hear her
confess that she was living in a house of the most infamous description
in the Rue-aux-Fêves in the Cité, and that she every morning purchased a
half-pennyworth of milk of me. She cannot deny either having repeatedly
spoken in my presence to the murderer of my poor husband. Oh, she knows
him well enough, I am quite certain; a pale young man, who smoked a good
deal, and always wore a cap and a blouse, and wore his hair very long;
she could tell his name if she chose. Is this true, or is it a lie?"
vociferously demanded the milk-woman.

"I may have spoken to the man who killed your husband," answered
Fleur-de-Marie, in a faint voice; "for, unhappily, there are more than
one in the Cité capable of such a crime. But, indeed, I know not of whom
you are speaking!"

"What does she say?" asked Madame Dubreuil, horror-struck at her words.
"She admits having possibly conversed with murderers?"

"Oh, such lost wretches as she is," replied the widow, "have no better
companions!"

At first, utterly stupefied by so singular a discovery, confirmed,
indeed, by Fleur-de-Marie's own admission, Madame Dubreuil seemed almost
incapable of comprehending the scene before her; but quickly the whole
truth presented itself to her mental vision, and shrinking from the
unfortunate girl with horror and disgust, she hastily seized her
daughter by the dress, as she was about to sustain the sinking form of
the poor Goualeuse, and, drawing her towards her with sudden violence,
she exclaimed:

"Clara! For Heaven's sake approach not that vile, that abandoned young
woman! Oh, dreadful, indeed, ever to have admitted her here! But how
came Madame Georges to have her under her roof? And how could she so far
insult me as to bring her here, and allow my daughter to--This is,
indeed, disgraceful! I hardly know whether to trust the evidence of my
own senses. But Madame Georges must have been as much imposed on as
myself, or she never would have permitted such an indignity! No, no! She
is incapable of such dishonourable conduct. It would, indeed, be a
disgrace for one female so to have deceived another."

Poor Clara, terrified and almost heart-broken at this distressing scene,
could scarcely believe herself awake. It seemed as though she were under
the influence of a fearful dream. Her innocent and pure mind
comprehended not the frightful charges brought against her friend; but
she understood enough to fill her with the most poignant grief at the
unfortunate position of La Goualeuse, who stood mute, passive and
downcast, like a criminal in the presence of the judge.

"Come, come, my child," repeated Madame Dubreuil, "let us quit this
disgraceful scene." Then, turning towards Fleur-de-Marie, she said:

"As for you, worthless girl, the Almighty will punish you as you deserve
for your deceit! That my child, good and virtuous as she is, should ever
have been allowed to call you sister or friend. Her sister! You--the
very vilest of the vile! the outcast of the most depraved and lost
wretches! What hardihood, what effrontery you must have possessed, to
dare to show your face among good and honest people, when your proper
place would have been along with your bad companions in a prison!"

"Ay, ay!" cried all the labourers at once; "let her be sent off to
prison at once. She knows the murderer! Let her be made to declare who
and what he is."

"She is most likely his accomplice!"

"You see," exclaimed the widow, doubling her fist in the face of the
Goualeuse, "that my words have come true. Justice will overtake you
before you can commit other crimes."

"As for you, my good woman," said Madame Dubreuil to the milk-woman,
"far from sending you away I shall reward you for the service you have
done me in unmasking this infamous girl's real character."

"There, I told you," murmured the voices of the labourers, "our mistress
always does justice to every one!"

"Come, Clara," resumed Madame Dubreuil, "let us retire and seek Madame
Georges, that she may clear up her share of this disgraceful business,
or she and I never meet again; for either she has herself been most
dreadfully deceived, or her conduct towards us is of the very worst
description."

"But, mother, only look at poor Marie!"

"Oh, never mind her! Let her die of shame, if she likes,--there will be
one wicked, hardened girl less in the world. Treat her with the contempt
she deserves. I will not suffer you to remain another instant where she
is. It is impossible for a young person like you to notice her in any
way without disgracing herself."

"My dear mother," answered Clara, resisting her mother's attempts to
draw her away, "I do not understand what you mean. Marie must be wrong
in some way, since you say so! But look, only look at her--she is
fainting! Pity her! Oh, mother, let her be ever so guilty, pray take
pity on her present distress!"

"Oh, Mlle. Clara, you are good--very, very good--to pardon me and care
for me," uttered poor Fleur-de-Marie, in a faint voice, casting a look
of unutterable gratitude on her young protectress. "Believe me, it was
sorely against my will ever to deceive you; and daily, hourly, have I
reproached myself for so doing."

"Mother," exclaimed Clara, in the most piteous tones, "are you then so
merciless? Can you not pity her?"

"Pity!" returned Madame Dubreuil, scornfully. "No, I waste no pity on
such as she is. Come, I say! Were it not that I consider it the office
of Madame Georges to clear the place of so vile a creature, I would have
her spurned from the doors, as though she carried the plague about with
her." So saying, the angry mother seized her daughter's hand, and, spite
of all her struggles, led her away, Clara continually turning back her
head, and saying:

"Marie, my sister, I know not what they accuse you of, but I am quite
convinced of your innocence. Be assured of my constant love, whatever
they may say or do."

"Silence! silence! I command!" cried Madame Dubreuil, placing her hand
over her daughter's mouth. "Speak not another word, I insist!
Fortunately, we have plenty of witnesses to testify that, after the
odious discovery we have just made, you were not suffered to remain a
single instant with this lost and unfortunate young woman. You can all
answer for that, can you not, my good people?" continued she, speaking
to the assembled labourers.

"Yes, yes, madame," replied one of them, "we all know well enough that
Mlle. Clara was not allowed to stop with this bad girl a single instant
after you found out her wickedness. No doubt she is a thief or she would
not be so intimate with murderers."

Madame Dubreuil led Clara to the house, while the Goualeuse remained in
the midst of the hostile circle which had now formed around her. Spite
of the reproaches of Madame Dubreuil, her presence, and that of Clara,
had, in some degree, served to allay the fears of Fleur-de-Marie as to
the probable termination of the scene. But, after the departure of both
mother and daughter, when she found herself so entirely at the mercy of
the enraged crowd, her strength seemed to forsake her, and she was
obliged to keep herself from falling by leaning on the parapet of the
deep watering-place where the farm cattle were accustomed to drink.

Nothing could be conceived more touching than the attitude of the
unfortunate girl, nor could a more threatening appearance have been
displayed than was exhibited in the words and looks of the countrymen
and women who surrounded her. Seated, or rather supporting herself on
the narrow margin of the wall which enclosed the drinking-place, her
head hanging down, and concealed by both hands, her neck and bosom hid
by the ends of the little red cotton handkerchief which was twisted
around her cap, the poor Goualeuse, mute and motionless, presented a
most touching picture of grief and resignation.

At some little distance from Fleur-de-Marie stood the widow of the
murdered man. Triumphant in her vindictive rage, and still further
excited by the indignation expressed by Madame Dubreuil, she pointed out
the wretched object of her wrath to the labourers and her children, with
gestures of contempt and detestation. The farm servants, who had now
formed into a close circle, sought not to conceal their disgust and
thirst for vengeance; their rude countenances expressed at once rage,
desire for revenge, and a sort of insulting raillery. The women were
even still more bitter, and bent upon mischief. Neither did the striking
beauty of the Goualeuse tend to allay their wrath. But neither men nor
women could pardon Fleur-de-Marie the heinous offence of having, up to
that hour, been treated by their superiors as an equal; and some of the
men now present, having been unsuccessful candidates for the vacant
situations at Bouqueval, and attributing their failure to Madame
Georges, when, in reality, their disappointment arose entirely from
their recommendations not being sufficiently satisfactory, determined to
avail themselves of the opportunity now before them to wreak their
vexation and ill-will on the head of one she was known to protect and
love. The impulses of ignorant minds always lead to extremes either of
good or bad. But they speedily put on a most dangerous form, when the
fury of an enraged multitude is directed against those who may already
have awakened their personal anger or aversion.

Although the greater number of the labourers now collected together
might not have been so strictly virtuous and free from moral blame as to
be justified in throwing the first stone at the trembling, fainting
girl, who was the object of all their concentrated wrath, yet, on the
present occasion, they unanimously spoke and acted as though her very
presence was capable of contaminating them; and their delicacy and
modesty alike revolted at the bare recollection of the depraved class to
which she had belonged, and they shuddered to be so near one who
confessed to having frequently conversed with assassins. Nothing, then,
was wanting to urge on a blind and prejudiced crowd, still further
instigated by the example of Madame Dubreuil.

"Take her before the mayor!" cried one.

"Ay, ay! and, if she won't walk, we'll drag her."

"And for her to have the impudence to dress herself like one of us
honest girls!" said an awkward, ill-looking farm-wench.

"I'm sure," rejoined another female, with her mock-modest air, "one
might have thought she would go to heaven, spite of priest or
confession!"

"Why, she had the assurance even to attend mass!"

"No! Did she? Why did she not join in the communion afterwards then, I
should like to know?"

"And then she must play the young lady, and hold up her head as high as
our betters!"

"As though we were not good company enough for her!"

"However, every dog has his day!"

"Oh, I'll make you find your tongue, and tell who it was took my
husband's life!" vociferated the enraged widow, breaking out into a
fresh storm, now she felt her party so strong. "You all belong to one
gang; and I'm not sure but I saw you among them at the very time and
place when the bloody deed was done! Come, come; don't stand there
shedding your crocodile tears; you are found out, and may as well leave
off shamming any more. Show your face, I say! You are a beauty, ain't
you?" And the infuriated woman, suiting the action to the word,
violently snatched the two hands of poor Fleur-de-Marie from the pale
and grief-worn countenance they concealed, and down which tears were
fast streaming.

The Goualeuse, sinking under a sense of shame, and terrified at finding
herself thus at the mercy of her persecutors, joined her hands, and,
turning towards the milk-woman her supplicating and timid looks, she
said, in a gentle voice:

"Indeed, indeed, madam, I have been at the farm of Bouqueval these last
two months. How could I, then, have been witness to the dreadful
misfortune you speak of? And--"

The faint tones of Fleur-de-Marie's voice were drowned in the loud
uproarious cries of the surrounding multitude.

"Let us take her before the mayor! She can speak; and she shall, too, to
some purpose. March, march, my fine madam! On with you!"

So saying, the menacing crowd pressed upon the poor girl, who,
mechanically crossing her hands on her bosom, looked eagerly around, as
though in search of help.

"Oh," cried the milk-woman, "you need not stare about in that wild way.
Mlle. Clara is not here now to take your part. You don't slip through
my fingers, I promise you!"

"Alas! madam," uttered Fleur-de-Marie, trembling violently, "I seek not
to escape from you. Be assured, I am both ready and willing to answer
all the questions put to me, if I can be of any service to you by so
doing. But what harm have I done to these people, who surround and
threaten me in this manner?"

"What have you done?" repeated a number of voices, "why, you have dared
to stick yourself up with our betters, when we, who were worth thousands
more than such as you, were made to keep our distance,--that's what you
have done!"

"And what right had you to cause this poor woman to be turned away with
her fatherless children?" cried another.

"Indeed, it was no fault of mine. It was Mlle. Clara, who wished--"

"That is not true!" interrupted the speaker. "You never even opened your
mouth in her favour. No, not you? You were too well pleased to see her
bread taken from her."

"No, no! no more she did," chimed in a burst of voices, male and female.

"She is a regular bad one!"

"A poor widow-woman, with three helpless children!"

"If I did not plead for her with Mlle. Clara, it was because I had not
power to utter a word."

"You could find strength enough to talk to a set of thieves and
murderers!"

And, as is frequently the case in public commotions, the country people,
more ignorant than vicious, actually talked themselves into a fury,
until their own words and violence excited them to fresh acts of rage
and vengeance against their unhappy victim.

The menacing throng, gesticulating, and loudly threatening, advanced
closer and closer towards Fleur-de-Marie, while the widow appeared to
have lost all command over herself. Separated from the deep pond only by
the parapet on which she was leaning, the Goualeuse shuddered at the
idea of their throwing her into the water; and, extending towards them
her supplicating hands, she exclaimed:

"Good, kind people! what do you want with me? For pity's sake do not
harm me!"

And as the milk-woman, with fierce and angry gestures, kept coming
nearer and nearer, holding her clenched fist almost in the face of
Fleur-de-Marie, the poor girl, drawing herself back in terror, said, in
beseeching tones:

"Pray, pray, do not press so closely on me, or you will cause me to fall
into the water."

These words suggested a cruel idea to the rough spectators. Intending
merely one of those practical jokes which, however diverting to the
projectors, are fraught with serious harm and suffering to the
unfortunate object of them, one of the most violent of the number called
out, "Let's give her a plunge in! Duck her! duck her!"

"Yes, yes!" chimed several voices, accompanied with brutal laughter, and
noisy clapping of hands, with other tokens of unanimous approval. "Throw
her in!--in with her!"

"A good dip will do her good! Water won't kill her!"

"That will teach her not to show her face among honest people again!"

"To be sure. Toss her in!--fling her over!"

"Fortunately, the ice was broken this morning!"

"And when she has had her bath she may go and tell her street companions
how the folks at Arnouville farm serve such vile girls as she is!"

As these unfeeling speeches reached her ear, as she heard their
barbarous jokes, and observed the exasperated looks of the brutally
excited individuals who approached her to carry their threat into
execution, Fleur-de-Marie gave herself over for lost. But to her first
horror of a violent death succeeded a sort of gloomy satisfaction. The
future wore so threatening and hopeless an aspect for her that she
thanked heaven for shortening her trial. Not another complaining word
escaped her; but gently falling on her knees, and piously folding her
hands upon her breast, she closed her eyes, and meekly resigned herself
to her fate.

The labourers, surprised at the attitude and mute resignation of the
Goualeuse, hesitated a moment in the accomplishment of their savage
design; but, rallied on their folly and irresolution by the female part
of the assemblage, they recommenced their uproarious cries, as though to
inspire themselves with the necessary courage to complete their wicked
purpose.

Just as two of the most furious of the party were about to seize on
Fleur-de-Marie a loud, thrilling voice was heard, exclaiming:

"Stop! I command you!"

And at the very instant Madame Georges, who had forced a passage through
the crowd, reached the still kneeling Goualeuse, took her in her arms,
and, raising her, cried:

"Rise up, my child! Stand up, my beloved daughter! the knee should be
bent to God alone!"

The expression and attitude of Madame Georges were so full of courageous
firmness that the actors in this cruel scene shrunk back speechless and
confounded. Indignation coloured her usually pale features, and casting
on the labourers a stern look she said to them, in a loud and
threatening voice:

"Wretches! Are you not ashamed of such brutal conduct to a helpless girl
like this?"

"She is--"

"My daughter!" exclaimed Madame Georges, with severity, and abruptly
interrupting the man who was about to speak, "and, as such, both
cherished and protected by our worthy curé, M. l'Abbé Laporte, whom
every one venerates and loves; and those whom he loves and esteems ought
to be respected by every one!"

These simple words effectually imposed silence on the crowd. The curé of
Bouqueval was looked upon throughout his district almost as a saint, and
many there present were well aware of the interest he took in the
Goualeuse. Still a confused murmur went on, and Madame Georges, fully
comprehending its import, added:

"Suppose this poor girl were the very worst of creatures--the most
abandoned of her sex--your conduct is not the less disgraceful! What
offence has she committed? And what right have you to punish her?--you,
who call yourselves men, to exert your strength and power against one
poor, feeble, unresisting female! Surely it was a cowardly action all to
unite against a defenceless girl! Come, Marie! come, child of my heart!
let us return home; there, at least, you are known, and justly
appreciated."

Madame Georges took the arm of Fleur-de-Marie, while the labourers,
ashamed of their conduct, the impropriety of which they now perceived,
respectfully dispersed. The widow alone remained; and, advancing boldly
to Madame Georges, she said, in a resolute tone:

"I don't care for a word you say; and, as for this girl, she does not
quit this place until after she has deposed before the mayor as to all
she knows of my poor husband's murder."

"My good woman!" said Madame Georges, restraining herself by a violent
effort, "my daughter has no deposition to make here, but, at any future
period that justice may require her testimony let her be summoned, and
she shall attend with myself; until then no person has a right to
question her."

"But, madame, I say--"

Madame Georges prevented the milk-woman from proceeding by replying, in
a severe tone:

"The severe affliction you have experienced can scarcely excuse your
conduct, and you will one day regret the violence you have so improperly
excited. Mlle. Marie lives with me at the Bouqueval farm; inform the
judge who received your deposition of that circumstance, and say that we
await his further orders."

The widow, unable to argue against words so temperately and wisely
spoken, seated herself on the parapet of the drinking-place, and,
embracing her children, began to weep bitterly. Almost immediately after
this scene Pierre brought the chaise, into which Madame Georges and
Fleur-de-Marie mounted, to return to Bouqueval.

As they passed before the farmhouse of Arnouville, the Goualeuse
perceived Clara, who had hid herself behind a partly closed shutter,
weeping bitterly. She was evidently watching for a last glimpse of her
friend, to whom she waved her handkerchief in token of farewell.

"Ah, madame! what shame to me, and vexation to you, has arisen this
morning from our visit to Arnouville!" said Fleur-de-Marie to her
adopted parent, when they found themselves in the sitting-room at
Bouqueval; "you have probably quarrelled for ever with Madame Dubreuil,
and all on my account! Oh, I foresaw something terrible was about to
happen! God has justly punished me for deceiving that good lady and her
daughter! I am the unfortunate cause of perpetual disunion between
yourself and your friend."

"My dear child, my friend is a warm-hearted, excellent woman, but rather
weak; still I know her too well not to feel certain that by to-morrow
she will regret her foolish violence of to-day."

"Alas! madame, think not that I wish to take her part in preference to
yours. No, God forbid! but pardon me if I say that I fear your great
kindness towards me has induced you to shut your eyes to--Put yourself
in the place of Madame Dubreuil--to be told that the companion of your
darling daughter was--what I was--Ah, could any one blame such natural
indignation?"

Unfortunately Madame Georges could not find any satisfactory reply to
this question of Fleur-de-Marie's, who continued with much excitement:

"Soon will the degrading scene of yesterday be in everybody's mouth! I
fear not for myself, but who can tell how far it may affect the
reputation of Mlle. Clara? Who can answer for it that I may not have
tarnished her fair fame for ever? for did she not, in the face of the
assembled crowd, persist in calling me her friend--her sister? I ought
to have obeyed my first impulse, and resisted the affection which
attracted me towards Mlle. Dubreuil, and, at the risk of incurring her
dislike, have refused the friendship she offered me. But I forgot the
distance which separated me from her, and now, as you perceive, I am
suffering the just penalty; I am punished--oh, how cruelly punished! for
I have perhaps done an irreparable injury to one so virtuous and so
good."

"My child," said Madame Georges, after a brief silence, "you are wrong
to accuse yourself so cruelly. 'Tis true your past life has been
guilty--very highly so; but are we to reckon as nothing your having, by
the sincerity of your repentance, obtained the protection and favour of
our excellent curé? and was it not under his auspices and mine you were
introduced to Madame Dubreuil? and did not your own amiable qualities
inspire her with the attachment she so voluntarily professed for you?
was it not she herself who requested you to call Clara your sister? and,
finally, as I told her just now, for I neither wished nor ought to
conceal the whole truth from her, how could I, certain as I felt of your
sincere repentance--how could I, by divulging the past, render your
attempts to reinstate yourself more painful and difficult, perhaps
impossible, by throwing you, in despair of being again received by the
good and virtuous, back upon the scorn and derision of those who,
equally guilty, equally unfortunate as you have been, would not perhaps
like you have preserved the secret instinct of honour and virtue? The
disclosure made by the woman to-day is alike to be lamented and feared;
but could I, in anticipation of an almost impossible casualty, sacrifice
your present comfort and future repose?"

"Ah, madame, a convincing proof of the false and miserable position I
must ever hold may be found in the fact of your being obliged to conceal
the past; and that the mother of Clara despises me for that past; views
me in the same contemptuous light all will henceforward behold me, for
the scene at the farm of Arnouville will be quickly spread
abroad,--every one will hear of it! Oh, I shall die with shame! never
again can I meet the looks of any human being!"

"Not even mine, my child?" said Madame Georges, bursting into tears, and
opening her arms to Fleur-de-Marie, "you will never find in my heart any
other feeling than the devoted tenderness of a mother. Courage, then,
dear Marie! console yourself with the knowledge of your hearty and
sincere repentance; you are here surrounded with true and affectionate
friends, let this home be your world. We will anticipate the exposure
you dread so much; our worthy abbé shall assemble the people about the
farm, who all regard you with love and respect, and he shall tell them
the sad history of your past life; and, trust me, my child, told as the
tale would be by him, whose word is law here, such a disclosure will but
serve to increase the interest all take in your welfare."

"I would fain think so, dear madame, and I submit myself. Yesterday,
when we were conversing together, M. le Curé predicted to me that I
should be called upon painfully to expiate my past offences; I ought
not, therefore, to be astonished at their commencement. He told me also
that my earthly trials would be accepted as some atonement for the great
wrong I have done; I would fain hope so. Supported through these painful
ordeals by you and my venerable pastor, I will not--I ought not to
complain."

"You will go to his presence ere long, and never will his counsels have
been more valuable to you. It is already half-past four; prepare
yourself for your visit to the rectory, my child. I shall employ myself
in writing to M. Rodolph an account of what occurred at the farm at
Arnouville, and send my letter off by express; I will then join you at
our venerable abbé's, for it is most important we should talk over
matters together."

Shortly after the Goualeuse quitted the farm in order to repair to the
rectory by the hollow road, where the old woman, the Schoolmaster, and
Tortillard had agreed to meet.

       *       *       *       *       *

As may have been perceived in her conversations with Madame Georges and
the curé of Bouqueval, Fleur-de-Marie had so nobly profited by the
example of her benefactors, so assimilated herself with their
principles, that, remembering her past degradation, she daily became
more hopeless of recovering the place she had lost in society. As her
mind expanded so did her fine and noble instincts arrive at mature
growth, and bring forth worthy fruits in the midst of the atmosphere of
honour and purity in which she lived. Had she possessed a less exalted
mind, a less exquisite sensibility, or an imagination of weaker quality,
Fleur-de-Marie might easily have been comforted and consoled; but,
unfortunately, not a single day passed in which she did not recall, and
almost live over again, with an agony of horror and disgust, the
disgraceful miseries of her past life. Let the reader figure to himself
a young creature of sixteen, candid and pure, and rejoicing in that very
candour and purity, thrown, by frightful circumstances, into the
infamous den of the ogress, and irrecoverably subjected to the dominion
of such a fiend,--such was the reaction of the past on the present on
Fleur-de-Marie's mind. Let us still further display the resentful
retrospect, or, rather, the moral agony with which the Goualeuse
suffered so excruciatingly, by saying that she regretted, more
frequently than she had courage to own to the curé, the not having
perished in the midst of the slough of wickedness by which she was
encompassed.

However little a person may reflect, or however limited his knowledge of
life may be, he will not refuse to assent to our remarks touching the
commiseration which such a case as Fleur-de-Marie's fully called for.
She was deserving of both interest and pity, not only because she had
never known what it was to have her affections fairly roused, but
because all her senses were torpid, and as yet unawakened by noble
impulses--untaught, unaided, unadvised. Is it not wonderful that this
unfortunate girl, thrown at the tender age of sixteen years in the midst
of the herd of savage and demoralised beings who infest the Cité, should
have viewed her degrading position with horror and disgust, and have
escaped from the sink of iniquity morally pure and free from sin?




CHAPTER X.

THE HOLLOW WAY.


The sun was descending, and the fields were silent and deserted.
Fleur-de-Marie had reached the entrance to the hollow way, which it was
necessary to cross in her walk to the rectory, when she saw a little
lame lad, dressed in a gray blouse and blue cap, come out of the ravine.
He appeared in tears, and directly he saw the Goualeuse he ran towards
her.

"Oh, good lady, have pity on me, I pray!" he exclaimed, clasping his
hands with a supplicating look.

"What do you want? What is the matter with you, my poor boy?" said the
Goualeuse, with an air of interest.

"Alas, good lady! my poor grandmother, who is very, very old, has fallen
down in trying to climb up the ravine, and hurt herself very much. I am
afraid she has broken her leg, and I am too weak to lift her up myself.
_Mon Dieu!_ what shall I do if you will not come and help me? Perhaps my
poor grandmother will die!"

The Goualeuse, touched with the grief of the little cripple, replied:

"I am not very strong myself, my child; but perhaps I can help you to
assist your poor grandmother. Let us go to her as quickly as we can! I
live at the farm close by here; and, if the poor old woman cannot walk
there with us, I will send somebody to help her!"

"Oh, good lady, _le bon Dieu_ will bless you for your kindness! It is
close by here--not two steps down this hollow way, as I told you. It was
in going down the slope that she fell."

"You do not belong to this part of the country?" said the Goualeuse,
inquiringly following Tortillard, whom our readers have, no doubt,
recognised.

"No, good lady, we came from Ecouen."

"And where are you going?"

"To a good clergyman's, who lives on the hill out there," said Bras
Rouge's son, to increase Fleur-de-Marie's confidence.

"To the Abbé Laport's, perhaps?"

"Yes, good lady; to the Abbé Laport's. My poor grandmother knows him
very, very well."

"And I was going there also. How strange that we should meet," said
Fleur-de-Marie, advancing still farther into the hollow way.

"Grandmamma, I'm coming, I'm coming! Take courage, and I will bring you
help!" cried Tortillard, to forewarn the Schoolmaster and the Chouette
to prepare themselves to lay hands on their victim.

"Your grandmother, then, did not fall down far off from here?" inquired
the Goualeuse.

"No, good lady; behind that large tree there, where the road turns,
about twenty paces from here."

Suddenly Tortillard stopped.

The noise of a horse galloping was heard in the silence of the place.

"All is lost again!" said Tortillard to himself.

The road made a very sudden bend a few yards from the spot where Bras
Rouge's son was with the Goualeuse. A horseman appeared at the angle,
and when he came nigh to the young girl he stopped. And then was heard
the trot of another horse; and some moments after there followed a groom
in a brown coat with silver buttons, white leather breeches, and
top-boots. A leathern belt secured around his waist his master's
macintosh. His master was dressed simply in a stout brown frock-coat,
and a pair of light gray trousers, which fitted closely. He was mounted
on a thoroughbred and splendid bay horse, which he sat admirably, and
which, in spite of the fast gallop, had not a bead of sweat on his skin,
which was as bright and brilliant as a star. The groom's gray horse,
which stood motionless a few paces behind his master, was also well-bred
and perfect of his kind. In the handsome dark face of the gentleman
Tortillard recognised the Vicomte de Saint-Rémy, who was supposed to be
the lover of the Duchesse de Lucenay.

"My pretty lass," said the viscount to the Goualeuse, whose lovely
countenance struck him, "would you be so obliging as to tell me the way
to the village of Arnouville?"

Fleur-de-Marie's eyes sunk before the bold and admiring look of the
young man, as she replied:

"On leaving the sunken road, sir, you must take the first turning to the
right, and that path will lead you to an avenue of cherry-trees, which
is the straight road to Arnouville."

"A thousand thanks, my pretty lass! You tell me better than an old
woman, whom I found a few yards further on stretched under a tree, for I
could only get groans and moans out of her."

"My poor grandmother!" said Tortillard, in a whining tone.

"One word more," said M. de Saint-Rémy, addressing La Goualeuse. "Can
you tell me if I shall easily find M. Dubreuil's farm at Arnouville?"

Goualeuse could not prevent a shudder at these words, which recalled to
her the painful scene of the morning. She replied:

"The farm-buildings border the avenue which you must enter to reach
Arnouville, sir."

"Once more, many thanks, my pretty dear," said M. de Saint-Rémy; and he
galloped off with his groom.

The handsome features of the viscount were in full animation whilst he
was talking to Fleur-de-Marie, but when he was again alone they became
darkened and contracted by painful uneasiness. Fleur-de-Marie,
remembering the unknown person for whom they were so hastily preparing a
pavilion at the farm of Arnouville by Madame de Lucenay's orders, felt
convinced it was for this young and good-looking cavalier.

The sound of the horses' feet as they galloped on was heard for some
time on the hard and frozen ground, and by degrees grew fainter, then
were no longer heard, and all was once more hushed in silence.
Tortillard breathed again. Desirous of encouraging and warning his
accomplices, one of whom, the Schoolmaster, was concealed from the
horsemen, Bras Rouge's son called out:

"Granny! granny! here I am! with the good lady who is coming to help
you!"

"Quick, quick, my boy! The gentleman on horseback has made us lose some
time," said the Goualeuse, walking at a quicker pace, that she might
reach the turning into the hollow way.

She had scarcely entered it when the Chouette, who was hidden there,
exclaimed:

"Now then, _fourline_!"

Then springing upon the Goualeuse, the one-eyed hag seized her by the
neck with one hand, whilst with the other she pressed her mouth; and
Tortillard, throwing himself at the young girl's feet, clung round her
legs, that she might not be able to stir.

This took place so rapidly that the Chouette had no time to examine the
Goualeuse's features; but during the few instants it required for the
Schoolmaster to quit the hole in which he was ensconced, to grope his
way along with his cloak, the beldame recognised her old victim.

"La Pegriotte!" she exclaimed, in great surprise. Then adding with
savage delight, "What, is it you? Ah, the baker (the devil) sends you!
It is your fate, then, to fall into my clutches! I have my vitriol in
the _fiacre_ now, and your white skin shall have a touch, miss; for it
makes me sick to see your fine lady countenance. Come, my man, mind she
don't bite; and hold her tight whilst we bundle her up."

The Schoolmaster seized the Goualeuse in his two powerful hands, and
before she could utter a cry the Chouette threw the cloak over her head,
and wrapped her up in it, tightly and securely. In a moment,
Fleur-de-Marie, tied and enveloped, was without any power to move or
call for assistance.

"Now take up your parcel, _fourline_," said the Chouette. "He, he, he!
This is not such a load as the 'black peter' of the woman who was
drowned in the Canal of St. Martin---is it, my man?" And as the brigand
shuddered at these words, which reminded him of his fearful vision, the
one-eyed hag resumed, "Well, well, what ails you, _fourline_? Why, you
seem frozen! Ever since the morning your teeth chatter as if you had the
ague; and you look in the air as if you were looking for something
there!"

"Vile impostor! He is looking to see the flies," said Tortillard.

"Come, quick! Haste forward, my man! Up with Pegriotte! That's it!" said
the Chouette, as she saw the ruffian lift Fleur-de-Marie in his arms as
he would carry a sleeping infant. "Quick to the coach! quick,--quick!"

"But who will lead me?" inquired the Schoolmaster, in a hoarse voice,
and securing his light and flexible burden in his herculean arms.

"Old wise head!--he thinks of every thing!" said the Chouette.

Then, lifting aside her shawl, she unfastened a red pocket-handkerchief
which covered her skinny neck, and, twisting it into its length, said
to the Schoolmaster:

"Open your ivories, and take the end of this 'wipe' between them. Hold
tight! Tortillard will take the other end in his hand, and you have
nothing to do but to follow him. The good blind man requires a good dog!
Here, brat!"

The cripple cut a caper, and made a sort of low and odd barking. Then,
taking the other end of the handkerchief in his hand, he led the
Schoolmaster in this way, whilst the Chouette hastened forward to
apprise Barbillon. We have not attempted to paint Fleur-de-Marie's
terror when she found herself in the power of the Chouette and the
Schoolmaster. She felt all her strength leave her, and could not offer
the slightest resistance.

Some minutes afterwards the Goualeuse was lifted into the _fiacre_ which
Barbillon drove, and although it was night they closed the window-blinds
carefully; and the three accomplices went, with their almost expiring
victim, towards the plain of St. Denis, where Thomas Seyton awaited
them.




CHAPTER XI.

CLÉMENCE D'HARVILLE.


The reader will kindly excuse our having left one of our heroines in a
most critical situation, the _dénouement_ of which we shall state
hereafter.

It will be remembered that Rodolph had preserved Madame d'Harville from
an imminent danger, occasioned by the jealousy of Sarah, who had
acquainted M. d'Harville with the assignation Clémence had so
imprudently granted to M. Charles Robert. Deeply affected with the scene
he had witnessed, the prince returned directly home after quitting the
Rue du Temple, putting off till the next day the visit he purposed
paying to Mlle. Rigolette and the distressed family of the unfortunate
artisan, of whom we have spoken, believing them out of the reach of
present want, thanks to the money he had given Madame d'Harville to
convey to them, in order that her pretended charitable visit to the
house might assume a more convincing appearance in the eyes of her
husband.

Unfortunately, Rodolph was ignorant of Tortillard's having possessed
himself of the purse, although the reader has already been told how the
artful young thief contrived to effect the barefaced cheat.

About four o'clock the prince received the following letter, which was
brought by an old woman, who went away the instant she had delivered it
without awaiting any answer.

   "MY LORD:

     "I owe you more than life; and I would fain express my heartfelt
   gratitude for the invaluable service you have rendered me to-day.
   To-morrow shame would, perhaps, close my lips. If your royal
   highness will honour me with a call this evening, you will finish
   the day as you began it--by a generous action.

                                          "D'ORBIGNY D'HARVILLE.

     "P.S. Do not, my lord, take the trouble to write an answer. I
   shall be at home all the evening."

However rejoiced Rodolph felt at having been the happy instrument of
good to Madame d'Harville, he yet could not help regretting the sort of
a forced intimacy which this circumstance all at once established
between himself and the marquise. Deeply struck with the graceful
vivacity and extreme beauty of Clémence, yet wholly incapable of
infringing upon the friendship which existed between himself and the
marquis, Rodolph, directly he became aware of the passion which was
springing up in his heart for the wife of his friend, almost denied
himself (after having previously devoted a whole month to the most
assiduous attentions) the pleasure of beholding her. And now, too, he
recollected with much emotion the conversation he had overheard at the
embassy between Tom and Sarah, when the latter, by way of accounting for
her hatred and jealousy, had affirmed, and not without truth, that
Madame d'Harville still felt, even unknown to herself, a serious
affection for Rodolph.

Sarah was too acute, too penetrating, too well versed in the knowledge
of the human heart, not to be well aware that Clémence, believing
herself scorned by a man who had made so deep an impression on her
heart, and yielding, from the effects of her irritated feelings, to the
importunities of a perfidious friend, might be induced to interest
herself in the imaginary woes of M. Charles Robert, without,
consequently, forgetting Rodolph. Other women, faithful to the memory of
a man they had once distinguished, would have remained indifferent to
the melancholy looks of the commandant. Clémence d'Harville was
therefore doubly blamable, although she had only yielded to the
seduction of unhappiness, and, fortunately for her, had been preserved
alike by a keen sense of duty and the remembrance of the prince (which
still lurked in her heart, and kept faithful watch over it) from the
commission of an irreparable fault.

A thousand contradictory emotions disturbed the mind of Rodolph, as he
thought of his interview with Madame d'Harville. Firmly resolved to
resist the predilection which attracted him to her society, sometimes he
congratulated himself on being able to cast off his love for her by the
recollection of her having entangled herself with such a being as
Charles Robert; and the next instant he bitterly deplored seeing the
flattering veil with which he had invested his idol fall to the ground.

       *       *       *       *       *

Clémence d'Harville, on her part, awaited the approaching interview with
much anxiety; but the two prevailing sentiments which pervaded her
breast were painful confusion, when she remembered the interference of
Rodolph, and a fixed aversion when she thought of M. Charles Robert, and
many reasons were concerned in this feeling of dislike almost
approaching hatred itself. A woman will risk her honour or her life for
a man, but she will never pardon him for having placed her in a
mortifying or a ridiculous situation.

Madame d'Harville felt her cheeks flush, and her pulse beat rapidly as
she indignantly recalled the insulting looks and impertinent remarks of
Madame Pipelet. Nor was this all. After receiving from Rodolph an
intimation of the danger she was incurring, Clémence had proceeded
rapidly towards the fifth floor, as directed, but the position of the
staircase was such that, as she hurried on, she perceived M. Charles
Robert in his dazzling _robe de chambre_, at the very instant when,
recognising the light step of the woman he expected, he, with a
self-satisfied, confident, and triumphant look, set the door of his
apartment half open. The air of insolent familiarity, expressed by the
_negligée_ toilet he had assumed, quickly enabled the marquise to
perceive how entirely she had been mistaken in his character. Led away
by the kindness and goodness of her heart, and the generosity of her
disposition, to take a step which might for ever destroy her reputation,
she had accorded this meeting, not from love, but solely from
commiseration, in order to console him for the ridiculous part the bad
taste of the Duke de Lucenay had made him play before her at the
embassy. Words can ill describe the disgust and vexation with which
Madame d'Harville beheld the slipshod _déshabillé_ of the commandant,
implying as it did his opinion how completely her ill-judged
condescension had broken down the barriers of etiquette, and led him to
consider no further respect towards her necessary.

The timepiece in the small salon which Madame d'Harville ordinarily
occupied struck nine o'clock. Dressmakers and tavern-keepers have so
much abused the style of Louis XV. and the Renaissance, that the
marquise, a woman of infinite taste, had excluded from her apartments
this description of ornament, now become so vulgarised, and confined it
to that part of the hôtel devoted to the reception of visitors and grand
entertainments. Nothing could be more elegant or more _distingué_ than
the fitting-up of the salon in which the marquise awaited Rodolph. The
colour of the walls as well as the curtains (which, without either
valances or draperies, were of Indian texture) was bright straw colour,
on which were embroidered, in a darker shade, in unwrought silk,
arabesques of the most beautiful designs and whimsical devices. Double
curtains of point d'Alençon entirely concealed the windows. The
rosewood doors were set off with gold mouldings, most beautifully
carved, surrounding in each panel an oval medallion of Sèvres china,
nearly a foot in diameter, representing a numberless variety of birds
and flowers of surpassing brilliancy and beauty. The frames of the
looking-glasses and the cornices of the curtains were also of rosewood,
ornamented with similar raised work of silver gilt. The white marble
mantelpiece, with its supporting caryatides of antique beauty and
exquisite grace, was from the chisel of the proud and imperious
Marochetti, that great artist having consented to sculpture this
delicious _chef-d'oeuvre_ in imitation of Benvenuto Cellini, who
disdained not to model ewers and armour. Two candelabras, and two
candlesticks of vermeil, forming groups of small figures beautifully
executed, stood on either side of the timepiece, which was formed of a
square block of lapis lazuli raised on a pedestal of Oriental jasper,
and surmounted with a large and magnificently enamelled golden cup,
richly studded with rubies and pearls, once the property of the
Florentine Republic. Several excellent pictures of the Venetian school,
of middle size, completed this assemblage of elegance and refined taste.

Thanks to a most charming invention but recently introduced, this
splendid yet simple apartment was lighted only by the soft rays of a
lamp, the unground surface of whose crystal globe was half hid among a
mass of real flowers, contained in an immensely large and deep blue and
gold Japan cup, suspended from the ceiling like a lustre by three chains
of vermeil, around which were entwined the green stalks of several
climbing plants; while some of the flexible branches, thickly laden with
flowers, overhanging the edge of the cup and hanging gracefully down,
formed a waving fringe of fresh verdure, beautifully contrasting with
the blue and gold enamel of the purple porcelain.

We have been thus precise in these details, trifling as they may seem,
in order to give some idea of the exquisite taste possessed by Madame
d'Harville (the almost invariable companion of an elevated mind), and
also because misfortunes always strike us as more poignantly cruel when
they insinuate themselves into abodes like this, the favoured possessors
of which seem gifted by Providence with everything to make life happy
and enviable.

Buried in the downy softness of a large armchair, totally covered by the
same straw-coloured Indian silk as formed the rest of the hangings,
Clémence d'Harville sat, awaiting the arrival of Rodolph. Her hair was
arranged in the most simple manner. She wore a high dress of black
velvet, which well displayed the beauty and admirable workmanship of her
large collar and cuffs of English lace, which prevented the extreme
black of the velvet from contrasting too harshly with the dazzling
whiteness of her throat and hands.

In proportion as the hour approached for her interview with Rodolph, the
emotion of the marquise increased; but by degrees her embarrassment
ceased, and firmer resolves took possession of her mind. After a long
and mature reflection she came to the determination of confiding to
Rodolph a great, a cruel secret, hoping by her frankness to win back
that esteem she now so highly prized. Awakened by gratitude, her
pristine admiration of Rodolph returned with fresh force; one of those
secret whispers, which rarely deceives the heart that loves, told her
that chance alone had not brought the prince so opportunely to her
succour, and that his studied avoidance of her society during the last
few months had originated in anything but indifference. A vague
suspicion also arose in her mind as to the reality and sincerity of the
affection Sarah professed for her.

While deeply meditating on all these things, a _valet de chambre_,
having first gently tapped at the door, entered, saying:

"Will it please you, my lady, to see Madame Ashton and my young lady?"

Madame d'Harville made an affirmative gesture of assent, and a little
girl slowly entered the room.

The child was about four years old, and her countenance would have been
a very charming one but for its sickly pallor and extreme meagreness.
Madame Ashton, the governess, held her by the hand, but, directly Claire
(that was the name of the little girl) saw her mother, she opened her
arms, and, spite of her feebleness, ran towards her. Her light brown
hair was plaited, and tied at each side of her forehead with bows of
cherry-coloured riband. Her health was so delicate that she wore a
wrapping-dress of dark brown silk instead of one of those pretty little
white muslin frocks trimmed with ribands of a similar colour as those in
the hair, and well cut over the bosom to show the plump, pinky arms, and
smooth, fair shoulders, so lovely in healthy children. So sunken were
the cheeks of poor Claire that her large dark eyes looked quite
enormous. But, spite of every appearance of weakness, a sweet and gentle
smile lit up her small features when she was placed on the lap of her
mother, whom she kissed and embraced with intense yet mournful
affection.

"How has she been of late, Madame Ashton?" inquired Madame d'Harville of
the governess.

"Tolerably well, madame; although at one time I feared."

"Again!" cried Clémence, pressing her daughter to her heart with a
movement of involuntary horror.

"Fortunately, madame, I was mistaken," said the governess, "and the
whole passed away without any further alarm; Mademoiselle Claire became
composed, and merely suffered from a momentary feeling of weakness. She
has not slept much this afternoon, but I could not coax her to bed
without allowing her the pleasure of paying a visit to you."

"Dear little angel!" cried Madame d'Harville, covering her daughter with
kisses.

The interesting child repaid her mother's caresses with infantine
delight, when the groom of the chambers entered and announced:

"His royal highness the Grand Duke of Gerolstein."

Claire, standing on her mother's lap, had thrown her arms about her
neck, and was clasping her with all the force of which her tiny arms
were capable. At the sight of Rodolph, Clémence blushed deeply, set her
child gently down on the carpet, and signed to Madame Ashton to take her
away; she then rose to receive her guest.

"You must give me leave," said Rodolph, smilingly, after having
respectfully bowed to the marquise, "to renew my acquaintance with my
little friend here, who I fear has almost forgotten me."

And, stooping down a little, he extended his hand to Claire, who, first
gazing at him with her large eyes, curiously scrutinised his features,
then, recognising him, she made a gentle inclination of the head, and
blew him a kiss from the tips of her small, thin fingers.

"You remember my lord, then, my child?" asked Clémence of little Claire,
who gave an assenting nod, and kissed her hand to Rodolph a second time.

"Her health appears to me much improved since I last saw her," said he,
addressing himself with unfeigned interest to Clémence.

"Thank heaven, my lord, she is better, though still sadly delicate and
suffering."

The marquise and the prince, mutually embarrassed at the thoughts of the
approaching interview, would have been equally glad to defer its
commencement, through the medium of Claire's presence; but, the discreet
Madame Ashton having taken her away, Rodolph and Clémence were left
quite alone.

[Illustration: "_You Must Give Me Leave_"
Original Etching by L. Poiteau]

The armchair in which Madame d'Harville was reclining stood on the right
hand of the chimney, and Rodolph remained without attempting to seat
himself, gracefully leaning his elbow on the mantelpiece. Never had
Clémence been so strongly impressed with admiration at the noble and
prepossessing appearance of the prince; never had his voice sounded more
gentle or sweet upon her ear. Fully understanding how painful it must be
to the marquise to open the conversation, Rodolph at once proceeded to
the main point by observing:

"You have been, madame, the victim of a base and treacherous action. A
cowardly and dishonourable disclosure on the part of the Countess
Macgregor has well-nigh effected irremediable mischief."

"Is it, indeed, so?" exclaimed Clémence, painfully surprised; "then my
presentiments were not ill-founded! And by what means did your royal
highness discover this?"

"Last night, at the ball given by the Countess C----, I discovered this
infamous secret. I was sitting in a lone part of the 'Winter Garden,'
when Countess Sarah and her brother, unconscious that a mass of verdure
alone concealed me from them, while it enabled me to hear each word they
spoke, began conversing freely upon their own projects, and the snare
they had spread for you. Anxious to warn you of the danger with which
you were threatened, I hastened to Madame de Nerval's ball, hoping to
meet you there, but you did not appear. To write and direct my letter
here was to incur the risk of its falling into the hands of the marquis,
whose suspicions were already aroused by your treacherous friend; and I
therefore preferred awaiting your arrival in the Rue du Temple, that I
might unfold to you the perfidy of Countess Macgregor. Let me hope you
will pardon my thus long dwelling on a subject which must be so painful
to you. And, but for the few lines you were kind enough to write, never
would my lips have in any way reverted to it."

After a momentary silence, Madame d'Harville said to Rodolph:

"There is but one way, my lord, in which I can prove to you my gratitude
for your late generous conduct. It is to confess to you that which I
have never revealed to a human being. What I have to say will not
exculpate me in your estimation, but it will, perhaps, enable you to
make some allowances for my imprudence."

"Candidly speaking, madame," said Rodolph, smiling, "my position as
regards you is a very embarrassing one."

Clémence, astonished at the almost jesting tone in which he spoke,
looked at Rodolph with extreme surprise, while she said, "How so, my
lord?"

"Thanks to a circumstance you are doubtless acquainted with, I am
obliged to assume the grave airs of a mentor touching an incident which,
since you have so happily escaped the vile snare laid for you by
Countess Sarah, scarcely merits being treated with so much importance.
But," continued Rodolph with a slight shade of gentle and affectionate
earnestness, "your husband and myself are almost as brothers; and,
before our time, our fathers had vowed the sincerest friendship for each
other. I have, therefore, a double motive in most warmly congratulating
you on having secured the peace and happiness of your husband!"

"And it is from my knowledge of the high regard and esteem with which
you honour M. d'Harville, that I have determined upon revealing the
whole truth, as well as to explain myself relative to an interest which
must appear to you as ill-chosen and unworthy as it now seems to me. I
wish also to clear up that part of my conduct which bears an injurious
appearance against the tranquillity and honour of him your highness
styles 'almost a brother.'"

"Believe me, madame, I shall at all times be most proud and happy to
receive the smallest proof of your confidence. Yet permit me to say, as
regards the interest you speak of, that I am perfectly aware it
originated as much in sincere pity as from the constant importunities of
Countess Sarah Macgregor, who had her own reasons for seeking to injure
you. And I also know equally well that you long hesitated ere you could
make up your mind to take the step you now so much regret."

Clémence looked at the prince with surprise.

"You seem astonished. Well, that you may not fancy I dabble in
witchcraft, some of these days I will tell you all about it," said
Rodolph, smiling. "But your husband is perfectly tranquillised, is he
not?"

"Yes, my lord," said Clémence, looking down in much confusion; "and it
is most painful to me to hear him asking my pardon for having ever
suspected me, and then eulogising my modest silence respecting my good
deeds."

"Nay, do not chide an illusion which renders him so happy. On the
contrary, endeavour to maintain the innocent deception. Were it not
forbidden to treat your late adventure lightly, and had not you, madame,
been so much involved in it, I would say that a woman never appears more
charming in the eyes of her husband than when she has some fault to
conceal. It is inconceivable how many little cajoleries, and what
winning smiles, are employed to ease a troubled conscience. When I was
young," added Rodolph, smiling, "I always, in spite of myself,
mistrusted any unusual marks of tenderness. And, by the same rule, I can
say of myself, that I never felt more disposed to appear in an amiable
light than when I was conscious of requiring forgiveness. So, directly I
perceived a more than ordinary anxiety to please and gratify me, I was
very sure (judging by my own conduct) to ascribe it to some little
peccadillo that needed overlooking and pardoning."

The light tone with which Rodolph continued to discuss an affair which
might have been attended with circumstances so fearful, at first excited
Madame d'Harville's wonder; but she quickly perceived that the prince,
beneath his outward appearance of trifling, sought to conceal, or at
least lessen, the importance of the service he had rendered her. And,
profoundly touched with his delicacy, she said:

"I comprehend your generous meaning, my lord; and you are fully at
liberty to jest and forget as much as you like the peril from which you
have preserved me. But that which I have to relate to you is of so
grave, so serious, and mournful a nature, is so closely connected with
the events of this morning, and your advice may so greatly benefit me,
that I beseech you to remember that to you I owe both my honour and my
life: yes, my lord, my life! My husband was armed; and he has owned, in
the excess of his repentance, that it was his intention to have killed
me, had his suspicions proved correct."

"Great God!" exclaimed Rodolph with emotion.

"And he would have been justified in so doing," rejoined Madame
d'Harville, bitterly.

"I beseech you, madame," said Rodolph,--and this time he spoke with deep
seriousness,--"I beseech you to be assured I am incapable of being
careless or indifferent to any matter in which you are concerned. If I
seemed but now to jest, it was but to make you think less of a
circumstance which has already occasioned you so much pain. But now,
madame, you may command my most solemn attention. Since you honour me by
saying my advice may be useful, I listen most anxiously and eagerly."

"You can, indeed, counsel me most beneficially, my lord. But, before I
explain to you my reasons for seeking your aid, I must say a few words
concerning a period of which you are ignorant,--I mean the years which
preceded my marriage with M. d'Harville."

Rodolph bowed, and Clémence continued:

"At sixteen years of age I lost my mother (and here a tear stole down
the fair cheek of Madame d'Harville). I cannot attempt to describe how
much I adored that beloved parent. Imagine, my lord, the very
personification of all earthly goodness. Her fondness for me was
excessive, and appeared her only consolation amid the many bitter
sorrows she had to endure. Caring but little for what is styled the
world, with delicate health, and a natural predilection for sedentary
occupation, her great delight had been in attending solely to my
education, and her ample store of solid and varied knowledge well fitted
her for the task. Conceive, my lord, her astonishment and mine when, in
my sixteenth year, my dear preceptress considered my education nearly
completed, my father--making the feeble health of my mother a
pretext--announced to us that a young and accomplished widow, whose
misfortunes rendered her justly interesting, would henceforth be charged
with finishing what my dear parent had begun. My mother at first
resolutely refused obedience to my father's command, while I in vain
besought him not to interpose a stranger's authority between myself and
my beloved mother. He was inexorable alike to our tears and prayers, and
Madame Roland, who stated herself to be the widow of a colonel who had
died in India, came to take up her abode with us, in the character of
governess to myself."

"What! the same Madame Roland your father married almost immediately
after the death of your mother?"

"The same, my lord."

"Was she, then, very beautiful?"

"Tolerably so,--nothing more."

"Clever,--witty, perhaps?"

"She was a clever dissembler,--a skilful manoeuvrer; her talent went
no higher. She might be about five and twenty years of age, with
extremely light hair and nearly white eyelashes; her eyes were large,
round, and a clear blue; the expression of her countenance was humble
and gentle; and while her outward manner was attentive, even to
servility, her real disposition was as perfidious as it was unfeeling."

"And what were her acquirements?"

"Positively none at all, my lord; and I cannot conceive how my father,
who until then had been so completely a slave to the dictates of worldly
propriety, did not reflect that the utter incapacity of this woman must
shamefully proclaim the real cause of her being in the house. My mother
earnestly pointed out to him the extreme ignorance of Madame Roland; he,
however, merely replied, in a tone which admitted of no further
argument, that, competent or otherwise, the young and interesting widow
should retain the situation in his establishment in which he had placed
her. This I heard subsequently. From that instant my poor mother
comprehended the whole affair, over which she deeply grieved; regretting
less, I fancy, her husband's infidelity than the domestic unhappiness
which would result from so indecorous a _liaison_, the account of which
she feared might reach my ears."

"But, even so far as his foolish passion was concerned, it seems to me
that your father acted very unwisely in introducing this woman into his
house."

"And you would be still more at a loss to understand his conduct if you
had but known the extreme formality and circumspection of his character.
Nothing could ever have induced him thus to trample under foot all the
established rules of society but the unbounded influence of Madame
Roland,--an influence she exercised with so much the more certainty as
she veiled her designs under the mask of the most passionate love for
him."

"But what was your father's age then?"

"About sixty."

"And he really credited the professions of love made by so much younger
a woman?"

"My father had been in his time one of the most fashionable and admired
men of the day. And Madame Roland, either following the suggestions of
her own artful mind or urged on by the counsels of others, who could
countenance much more--"

"Counsel such a person!"

"I will tell you, my lord. Imagining that a man whose reputation for
gallantry had always stood high in the world would, as he advanced in
years, be more easily delighted than another by being flattered upon his
personal advantages, and more credulously receive such compliments as
served to recall those days most soothing to his vanity to remember,
well, my lord, incredible as it may appear, this woman began to flatter
my poor misguided father upon the graceful _tournure_ of his features
and the inimitable elegance of his shape. And he in his sixtieth year!
Strange as you may consider it, spite of the excellent sense with which
my father was endowed, he fell blindly into the snare, coarse and vulgar
as it was. Such was--such still is, I doubt not--the secret of the
unbounded influence this woman obtained over him. And really, my lord,
spite of my present disinclination for mirth, I can scarcely restrain a
smile at the recollection of having frequently, before my marriage,
heard Madame Roland assert and maintain that what she styled real
maturity was the finest portion of a person's existence, and that this
maturity never began until about the fifty-fifth or sixtieth year of
one's age."

"I suppose that happened to be your father's age?"

"Precisely so, my lord! Then, and then only, according to Madame Roland,
had the understanding, combined with experience, attained their full
development; then only could a man, occupying a distinguished position
in the world, enjoy the consideration to which he was entitled; at that
period only were the _tout ensemble_ of his countenance, and the
exquisite grace of his manners, in their highest perfection; the
physiognomy offering at this delightful epoch of a man's life a heavenly
mixture of winning serenity and gentle gravity. Then the slight tinge of
melancholy, caused by the many recollections of the past deceit
experience is fain to look back upon, completes the irresistible charm
of real maturity; unappreciable (Madame Roland hastily added) except by
women with head and heart sufficiently good to despise the youthful
frivolity of a poor, inexperienced forty years, when the character and
countenance can scarcely be called formed, and when good taste turns
away from the boyish folly of such an immature season of life, and seeks
the fine, majestic features impressed with the sublime and poetic
expression resulting from a sixty years' study of the vast book of human
existence."

Rodolph could not restrain smiling at the powerful irony with which
Madame d'Harville sketched the portrait of her mother-in-law.

"There is one thing," said he to the marquise, "for which I cannot
forgive ridiculous people."

"What is that, my lord?"

"The being also wicked; which prevents our being able to laugh at them
as much as they deserve."

"They probably calculate upon that available advantage," replied
Clémence.

"Indeed, it is very probable, though equally lamentable, for, if it were
not for the recollection of all the pain Madame Roland has occasioned
you, I could be highly diverted with her system of real maturity as
opposed to the insipidity of mere boys of only forty years of age, who,
according to her assertion, would be scarcely out of their
leading-strings, as our grandfathers and grandmothers would say."

"What principally excited my aversion for her was the shamefulness of
her conduct towards my dear mother, and the unfortunately over-zealous
part she took in my marriage," said the marquise, after a moment's
pause.

Rodolph looked at her with much surprise.

"Nay, my lord," said Clémence, in a firm, though gentle tone, "I well
remember that M. d'Harville is your friend and my husband. I know
perfectly the grave importance of the words I have just uttered:
hereafter you yourself shall admit the justice of them. But to return to
Madame Roland, who was now, spite of her acknowledged incapacity,
established as my instructress: my mother had a long and most painful
altercation with my father on the subject, which drew down on us his
extreme displeasure, and from that period my mother and myself remained
secluded in our apartments, while Madame Roland, in quality of my
governess, directed the whole household, and almost publicly did the
honours of the mansion."

"What must your mother have suffered!"

"She did, indeed, my lord; but her sorrow was less for herself than me,
whose future destiny might be so deeply affected by the introduction of
this woman. Her health, always delicate, became daily weaker, and she
fell seriously ill. It chanced, most unfortunately, that our family
doctor, M. Sorbier, in whom she had the highest confidence, died about
this period, to my mother's extreme regret. Madame Roland immediately
urged my father to place my mother's case in the hands of an Italian
doctor, a particular friend of her own, and whom she described as
possessing a more than ordinary skill in the treatment of diseases.
Thanks to her importunities, my father, who had himself consulted him in
trifling maladies, and found no cause to be dissatisfied, proposed him
to my mother, who, alas, raised no objection. And this man it was who
attended upon her during her last illness."

Tears filled the eyes of Madame d'Harville as she uttered these words.

"I am ashamed to confess my weakness, my lord," added she; "but, for the
simple reason of this doctor having been appointed at the suggestion of
Madame Roland, he inspired me (and at that time without any cause) with
the most involuntary repugnance, and it was with the most painful
misgivings I saw him established in my mother's confidence. Still, as
regarded his knowledge of his profession, Doctor Polidori--"

"What do I hear?" exclaimed Rodolph.

"Are you indisposed, my lord?" inquired Clémence, struck with the sudden
expression the prince's countenance had assumed.

"No, no!" said Rodolph, as though unconscious of the presence of Madame
d'Harville, "no, I must be mistaken. Five or six years must have elapsed
since all this occurred, while I am informed that it is not more than
two years since Polidori came to Paris, and then under a feigned name.
He it was I saw yesterday,--I am sure of it,--the quack dentist
Bradamanti and Polidori are one and the same. Still, 'tis singular; two
doctors of the same name,[3]--what a strange rencontre!"

  [3] We must remind the reader that Polidori was a doctor of some
  eminence when he undertook the education of Rodolph.

"Madame," said Rodolph, turning to Madame d'Harville, whose astonishment
at his preoccupation still increased, "we will, if you please, compare
notes as to this Italian. What age was he?"

"About fifty."

"And his appearance,--his countenance?"

"Most sinister. Never shall I forget his clear, piercing, green eye, and
his nose curved like the bill of an eagle."

"'Tis he,--'tis he himself!" exclaimed Rodolph. "And do you think,
madame, that the Doctor Polidori you were describing is still in Paris?"

"That I cannot tell you, my lord. He quitted Paris about a year after my
father's marriage. A lady of my acquaintance, who at this period also
employed the Italian as her medical adviser--this lady, Madame de
Lucenay--"

"The Duchess de Lucenay?" interrupted Rodolph.

"Yes, my lord. But why this surprise?"

"Permit me to be silent on that subject. But, at the time of which you
speak, what did Madame de Lucenay tell you of this man?"

"She said that he travelled much after quitting Paris, and that she
often received from him very clever and amusing letters, descriptive of
the various places he visited. Now I recollect that, about a month ago,
happening to ask Madame de Lucenay whether she had heard lately from M.
Polidori, she replied, with an embarrassed manner, 'that nothing had
been heard of or concerning him for some time; that no one knew what had
become of him; and that by many he was supposed to be dead.'"

"Strange, indeed," said Rodolph, recalling the recent visit of Madame de
Lucenay to the charlatan Bradamanti.

"You know this man, then, my lord?"

"Unfortunately for myself, I do; but let me beseech you to continue your
recital; hereafter I will give you an insight into the history of this
Polidori."

"Do you mean the doctor?"

"Say, rather, the wretch stained with the most atrocious crimes."

"Crimes!" cried Madame d'Harville, in alarm; "can it be possible, the
man whom Madame Roland so highly extolled, and into whose hands my poor
mother was delivered, was guilty of crimes? Alas, my dear parent
lingered but a very short time after she passed into his care! Ah, my
lord, my presentiments have not deceived me!"

"Your presentiments?"

"Oh, yes! I was telling you just now of the invincible antipathy I felt
for this man from the circumstance of his having been introduced among
us by Madame Roland; but I did not tell you all, my lord."

"How so?"

"I was fearful lest the bitterness of my own griefs should make me
guilty of injustice towards an innocent person; but now, my lord, you
shall know everything. My mother had lain dangerously ill about five
days; I had always watched beside her, night as well as day. One
evening, that I felt much oppressed with confinement and fatigue, I went
to breathe the fresh air on the terrace of the garden: after remaining
about a quarter of an hour, I was returning by a long and obscure
gallery; by a faint light which streamed from the apartment of Madame
Roland I saw M. Polidori quit the room, accompanied by the mistress of
the chamber. Being in the shadow, they did not perceive me; Madame
Roland spoke some words to the doctor, but in so low a tone I could not
catch them; the doctor's answer was given in a louder key, and consisted
only of these words: 'The day after to-morrow;' and, when Madame Roland
seemed to urge him, still in so low a voice as to prevent the words
reaching me, he replied, with singular emphasis, 'The day after
to-morrow, I tell you,--the day after to-morrow.'"

"What could those words mean?"

"What did they mean? Alas, alas, my lord, it was on the Wednesday
evening I heard M. Polidori say 'The day after to-morrow;' on the Friday
my mother was a corpse!"

"Horrible, indeed!"

"After this mournful event I was consigned to the care of a relation,
who, forgetful of the afflicted state of my mind, as well as tender age,
told me, without reserve or consideration of the consequences, what
powerful reasons there were for my hating Madame Roland, and fully
enlightened me as to the ambitious projects entertained by this woman:
full well I could then imagine all my poor mother must have endured. I
thought my heart would break the first time I again saw my father, which
was upon the occasion of his coming to fetch me from the house of my
relation to take me into Normandy, where we were to pass the first
months of our mourning. During the journey he informed me, without the
least embarrassment, and as though it had been the most natural thing in
the world, that, out of regard for himself and me, madame had kindly
consented to take the command of the establishment, and to act as my
guide and friend. On arriving at Aubiers (so was my father's estate
called), the first object we beheld was Madame Roland, who had
established herself here on the very day of my mother's death. Spite of
her modest, gentle manner, her countenance betrayed an ill-disguised
triumph; never shall I forget the look, at once ironical and spiteful,
she cast on me as I descended from the carriage; it seemed to say, 'I am
mistress here,--'tis you who are the intruder.' A fresh grief awaited
me; whether from an inexcusable want of proper judgment or unpardonable
assurance, this woman occupied the apartment which had been my mother's:
in my just indignation I loudly complained to my father of this
unpleasant forgetfulness of my rights as well as wishes. He reprimanded
me severely for making any remonstrance on the subject, adding that it
was needless for me either to feel or express surprise on the subject,
as it was his desire I should habituate myself to consider Madame Roland
in every respect as a second mother, and show her a corresponding
deference. I replied that it would be a profanation to that sacred name
to act as he commanded; and, to his extreme wrath, I never allowed any
opportunity to escape by which I could evince my deeply rooted aversion
to Madame Roland. At times my father's rage knew no bounds, and bitterly
would he reproach me in the presence of that woman for the coldness and
ingratitude of my conduct towards an angel, as he styled her, sent by
heaven for our consolation and happiness. 'Let me entreat of you to
speak for yourself alone,' said I, one day, quite wearied with the
hypocritical conduct of Madame Roland and my father's blind infatuation.
The harshness and unreasonableness of his conduct became at last quite
unendurable; while Madame Roland, with the honeyed words of feigned
affection, would artfully intercede for me, because she well knew by so
doing she should only increase the storm she had raised. 'You must make
some allowances for Clémence,' she would say; 'the sorrow she
experiences for the excellent parent we all deplore is so natural, and
even praiseworthy, that you should respect her just grief, and pity her
for her unfounded suspicions.' 'You hear her! you hear her!' would my
father exclaim, pointing with mingled triumph and admiration to the
accomplished hypocrite; 'what angelic goodness! what enchanting
nobleness and generosity! Instantly entreat her pardon for the
unworthiness of your conduct.' 'Never!' I used to reply; 'the spirit of
my angel mother, who now beholds me, would be pained to witness such a
degradation in her child;' and, bursting with grief and mortification, I
would fly to my own chamber, leaving my father to dry the tears, and
calm the ruffled feelings of the woman I despised and hated. You will, I
hope, excuse me, my lord, for dwelling so long and so minutely on all my
early troubles, but it is only by so doing I can accurately describe to
you the sort of life I led at that period."

"I can enter fully into the painful subject; yet how often have the same
scenes been enacted in other families, and still, it is much to be
feared, will they be repeated till the end of time. But in what capacity
did your father introduce Madame Roland to the neighbourhood?"

"As my instructress and his friend, and she was estimated accordingly."

"I need scarcely inquire whether he shared in the solitude to which her
questionable character condemned the lady?"

"With the exception of some few and unavoidable visits, she saw no one.
My father, guided by his passion, or influenced by Madame Roland, threw
off his mourning for my mother ere he had worn it three months, under
the plea that the sable garb continually reminded him of his loss, and
prevented him from regaining his lost tranquillity. His manners to me
daily became colder and more estranged, while his perfect indifference
concerning me allowed a degree of liberty almost incredible in a person
of my age. I met him only at breakfast, after which he returned to his
study with Madame Roland, who acted as his secretary, read and answered
all his letters, etc.; that completed, they either walked or drove out
together, returning only an hour before dinner, against which, Madame
Roland would array herself in an elegant and well-chosen evening dress;
while my father would make a most studiously elaborate toilet, as
uncalled for as ill-adapted to his time of life. Occasionally, after
dinner, he received a few persons he could not avoid asking to his
house, when he would play at tric-trac with Madame Roland until ten
o'clock, at which hour he would offer his arm to conduct her to my
mother's apartment, and return to his guests. As for myself, I had
unrestrained permission to go where I pleased throughout the whole day.
Attended by a servant, I used to take long rides in the extensive woods
surrounding the château, and when, as occasionally happened, I felt my
spirits unequal to appearing at the dinner-table, not the slightest
inquiry was ever made after me, or my absence noticed."

"What singular neglect and forgetfulness!"

"Having accidentally encountered one of our neighbours during several
successive days of my excursions in the woods, I gave up riding there,
and confined myself entirely to the park."

"And how did this infamous woman conduct herself towards you when
alone?"

"She shunned all occasions of being with me as sedulously as I avoided
her; but once that we were unexpectedly _tête-à-tête_ with each other,
and that she was reproaching me for some severe words I had spoken the
preceding evening, she said, coldly, 'Have a care: you cannot contend
against my power; any such attempt will bring down certain ruin on your
head.' 'As it did upon that of my mother,' answered I. 'It is a pity,
madame, you have not M. Polidori by your side, to announce to you that
your vengeance can be satisfied--the day after to-morrow."

"And what reply did she make when you thus recalled those fearful
words?"

"She changed colour rapidly, her features were almost convulsed; then,
by a strong effort conquering her emotion, she angrily demanded what I
meant by the expression. 'Ask your own heart, madame,' answered I; 'in
the solitude of your chamber inquire of yourself to what I allude: your
conscience will find a ready explanation.' Shortly after that, a scene
occurred which for ever sealed my destiny.

"Among a great number of family portraits, which graced the walls of the
salon in which we usually spent the evening, was that of my mother. One
day I observed it had been removed from its accustomed place. Two
neighbours had dined with us. One of them, a M. Dorval, a country
lawyer, had always expressed the utmost veneration and respect for my
mother. When we reached the salon after dinner, I inquired of my father
what had become of my dear mother's picture. 'Cease!' cried my father,
significantly pointing to our guests, as though intimating his desire
that they should not hear any discussion on the subject; 'the reason of
the picture being taken away is that the sight of it continually
reminded me of the heavy loss I have sustained, and so prevented my
regaining my usual calmness and peace of mind.' 'And where is the
portrait at present?' inquired I. Turning towards Madame Roland, with an
impatient and uneasy air, he said, 'Where has the picture been put?' 'In
the lumber-room,' replied she, casting on me a glance of defiance,
evidently under the impression that the presence of witnesses would
prevent me from proceeding further in the matter. 'I can easily believe,
madame,' cried I, indignantly, 'that the recollection of my mother must
have been painful to you; but that was not a sufficient reason for
banishing from the walls the likeness of her who, when you were in want
and misery, kindly and charitably afforded you the shelter of her
roof.'"

"Excellent!" exclaimed Rodolph; "yours was, indeed, a stinging and a
just reproach."

"'Mademoiselle,' cried my father, 'you forget that this lady has
watched, and still continues to preside, with maternal solicitude over
your education; you also seem to banish from your recollection the very
high esteem and respect you are aware I entertain for her; and, since
you allow yourself thus to attack her before strangers, you will permit
me to tell you that, in my opinion, the charge of ingratitude lies at
the door of her who, overlooking the tender cares she has received,
presumes to reproach a person, deserving of the utmost interest and
respect, with misfortunes and calamities she so nobly sustained.' 'I
cannot venture to discuss the subject with you, my dear father,' said I,
submissively. 'Perhaps, then, mademoiselle, you will favour me with your
polite arguments in favour of rudeness and unmerited abuse,' cried
Madame Roland, carried away by rage into a neglect of her usual caution
and prudence; 'perhaps you will permit me to assert that, so far from
owing the slightest obligation to your mother, I have nothing to
remember but the constant coldness and dislike she invariably manifested
towards me, fully expressive of the disgust and displeasure with which
my residence in the house inspired her.' 'Forbear, madame!' exclaimed I,
interrupting her. 'Out of respect for my father, if not to spare your
own blushes, cease such shameful confessions as the one you have just
made, or you will make even me regret having exposed you to so
humiliating a disclosure.'"

"Better and better!" cried Rodolph; "this was, indeed, cutting with a
two-edged sword. Pray go on. And what said this woman?"

"By a very hackneyed, though convenient expedient, Madame Roland
contrived to end a scene in which she felt she was likely to have the
worst. With a sudden cry she threw herself into a chair, and very
naturally imitated a fainting-fit. Thanks to this incident, the two
visitors quitted the room in search of restoratives; while I retired to
my own apartment, leaving my father hanging in deep anxiety over the
wicked cause of all this confusion."

"Doubtless your next interview with your father must have been a stormy
one."

"He came to me next morning, and, without further preamble, addressed me
as follows: 'In order to prevent a recurrence of the disgraceful scene
of yesterday, I think proper to inform you, that, immediately that
decency permits both you and myself to throw off our mourning, it is my
intention to celebrate my marriage with Madame Roland, which will
compel you to treat her with the respect and deference due to my wife.
For certain reasons, it is expedient you should marry before me. You
will have as a dowry your mother's fortune, amounting to more than a
million francs. From this very day, I shall take the necessary steps to
form a suitable match for you, and, for that purpose, I shall accept one
of the many offers I have received for your hand.' After this
conversation, I lived more alone than ever, never meeting my father
except at mealtimes, which generally passed off in the utmost silence.
So really dull and lonely was my present existence, that I only waited
for my father to propose any suitor he might approve of, to accept him
with perfect willingness. Madame Roland, having relinquished all further
ill-natured remarks upon the memory of my deceased parent, indemnified
herself by inflicting on me the continual pain of seeing her appropriate
to herself the various trifles my dear mother had exclusively made use
of. Her easy chair, embroidery-frame, the books which composed her
private library, even a screen I myself had embroidered for her, and in
the centre of which were our united ciphers: this woman laid her
sacrilegious hands on all the elegant articles with which my mother's
taste and my affection had ornamented her apartments."

"I can well imagine all the horror these profanations must have caused
you."

"Still, great as were my sufferings, the state of loneliness, in which I
found myself, rendered them even greater."

"And you had no one, no person in whom you could confide?"

"No one; but at this time I received a touching proof of the interest my
fate excited, and which might have opened my eyes to the dangers
preparing for me. One of the two persons present, during the scene with
Madame Roland I so lately described, was a M. Dorval, a worthy old
notary, to whom my mother had rendered some signal service. By my
father's orders, I never since then entered the salon when strangers
were there; I had never, therefore, seen M. Dorval after the eventful
day when I spoke so undisguisedly to Madame Roland; great, therefore,
was my surprise to see him coming towards me one day, in the park, while
I was taking my accustomed walk. 'Mademoiselle,' said he to me, with a
mysterious air, 'I am fearful of being observed by your father; here is
a letter,--read it, and destroy it immediately,--its contents are most
important to you.' So saying, he disappeared as quickly as he came. In
the letter he informed me that it was in agitation to marry me to the
Marquis d'Harville, and that the match appeared in every respect
eligible, inasmuch as every one concurred in bearing testimony to the
many excellent qualities of M. d'Harville, who was young, rich,
good-looking, and highly distinguished for his talents and mental
attainments; yet that the families of two young ladies, with whom he had
been on the point of marriage, had abruptly broken off the matches. The
notary added that, although entirely ignorant of the cause of these
ruptures, he still considered it his duty to apprise me of them, without
in the slightest degree insinuating that they originated in any
circumstance prejudicial to the high opinion entertained of M.
d'Harville. The two young ladies alluded to were, one, the daughter of
M. Beauregard, a peer of France; the other, of Lord Dudley. M. Dorval
concluded by saying that his motive in making the communication was
because my father, in his extreme desire to conclude the marriage, did
not appear to attach sufficient importance to the facts now detailed."

"Now you recall it to my recollection," said Rodolph, after some minutes
spent in deep meditation on what he had just heard, "I remember that
your husband, at intervals of nearly twelve months, told me of two
marriages which had been broken off just as they were on the point of
taking place, and ascribing their abrupt termination to a difficulty in
arranging matters of a mere pecuniary nature."

Madame d'Harville smiled bitterly as she replied:

"You shall know what those motives really were, my lord, very shortly.
After reading the letter, so kindly intentioned on the part of the
worthy notary, I felt both my uneasiness and curiosity rapidly increase.
Who was D'Harville? My father had never mentioned him to me. In vain I
ransacked my memory; I could not recollect ever to have heard the name.
Soon, however, the current of my thoughts was directed into another
channel by the abrupt departure of Madame Roland for Paris. Although the
period of her absence was limited to eight days at the utmost, yet my
father expressed the deepest grief at even this trifling separation from
her. His temper became altogether soured, and his coldness towards me
hourly increased; he even went so far as to reply, when one day I
inquired after his health, 'I am ill,--and all through you.' 'Through
me?' exclaimed I. 'Assuredly, through you; you know full well how
indispensable to my happiness is the company of Madame Roland, yet this
incomparable woman, who has been so grossly insulted by you, has left me
to undertake her present journey solely on your account.' This mark of
interest on the part of Madame Roland filled me with the most lively
apprehensions of evil, and a vague presentiment floated across my mind
that my marriage was in some way or other mixed up with it. I must leave
it to your imagination, my lord, to picture the delight of my father
upon the return of my future mother-in-law. The next day he sent to
desire my company; I found him alone with her. 'I have, for some time,'
said he, 'been thinking of establishing you in the world; in another
month your mourning will have expired. To-morrow I expect M.
d'Harville, a young man possessed of every requisite, both as to fortune
and figure, to secure any woman's approbation; he is well looked upon in
society, and is capable of securing the happiness of any lady he may
seek in marriage. Now, having seen you, though accidentally, his choice
has fallen on you. In fact, he is most anxious to obtain your hand.
Every pecuniary arrangement is concluded. It therefore remains solely
with yourself to be married ere the next six weeks have elapsed. If, on
the contrary, from any capricious whim impossible for me to foresee, you
think fit to refuse the unlooked-for good offer now before you, it will
in no respect alter my own plans, as my marriage will take place,
according to my original intention, directly my mourning expires. And,
in this latter case, I am bound to inform you that your presence in my
house will not be agreeable to me, unless I have your promise to treat
my wife with the respect and tenderness to which she is entitled.' 'I
understand you,' replied I; 'whether I accept M. d'Harville or no, you
will marry; and my only resource will then be to retire to the Convent
of the Holy Heart?' 'It will,' answered he, coldly."

"His conduct now ceases to be classed under the term weakness," said
Rodolph; "it assumes the form of positive cruelty."

"Shall I tell you, my lord, what has always prevented me from feeling
the least resentment at my father's conduct? It is because I have always
had a strong presentiment that he would one day pay dearly--too dearly,
alas!--for his blind passion for Madame Roland. Thank Heaven, that evil
day has not yet arrived!"

"And did you not mention to your father what the old notary had informed
you of,--the abrupt breaking off of the two marriages M. d'Harville had
been on the point of contracting?"

"Indeed, I did, my lord. I signified to my father, upon the occasion of
the conversation I was relating to you, a wish to speak with him alone,
upon which Madame Roland abruptly rose and quitted the apartment. 'I
have no objection to the union you propose with M. d'Harville,' said I;
'only, as I understand, he has twice been upon the point of marriage,
and--' 'Enough--enough!' interrupted he, hastily. 'I know all about
those two affairs, which were so abruptly broken off merely because
matters of a pecuniary nature were not satisfactorily arranged;
although, I am bound to assure you, that not the slightest shadow of
blame was attributable to M. d'Harville. If that be your only objection,
you may consider the match as concluded on, and yourself as
married,--ay, and happily, too,--for, spite of your conduct, my first
wish is for your happiness.'"

"No doubt Madame Roland was delighted with your marriage?"

"Delighted? Yes, my lord," said Clémence, with bitterness. "She was, and
well might be, delighted with this union, which was, in fact, of her
effecting. She it was who had first suggested it to my father; she knew
full well the real occasion of breaking off the marriages so nearly
completed by M. d'Harville, and hence arose her exceeding anxiety for
him to become my husband."

"What motive could she possibly have had?"

"She sought to avenge herself on me by condemning me to a life of
wretchedness."

"But your father--"

"Deceived by Madame Roland, he fully and implicitly believed that
interested motives alone had set aside the two former marriages of M.
d'Harville."

"What a horrible scheme! But what was this mysterious reason?"

"You shall know shortly. Well, M. d'Harville arrived at Aubiers, and, I
confess, I was much pleased with his appearance, manners, and cultivated
mind. He seemed very amiable and kind, though somewhat melancholy. I
remarked in him a contradiction which charmed and astonished me at the
same time. His personal and mental advantages were considerable, his
fortune princely, and his birth illustrious; yet, at times, the
expression of his countenance would change, from a firm and manly energy
and decision of purpose, to an almost timid, shrinking look, as though
he feared even his own self; then an utter dejection of spirits and
exhaustion would ensue. There was, at these strangely contrasted
periods, such a look of deprecating humility, such an appearance of
conscious wrong, as touched me deeply, and won my pity to a great
extent. I admired greatly the kindness of manner he ever evinced to an
old servant,--a _valet de chambre_ who had been about him from his
birth, and who alone was suffered to attend upon his master now he had
reached man's estate. Shortly after M. d'Harville's arrival he remained
for two days secluded in his apartment. My father wished to visit him;
but the old servant alluded to objected, stating that his master had so
violent a headache, he could receive no one. When M. d'Harville emerged
from his chamber, he was excessively pale, and looked extremely ill. He
afterwards appeared to experience a sort of impatience and uneasiness
when any reference was made to his temporary indisposition. In
proportion as I became better acquainted with M. d'Harville, I
discovered that, on many points, a singular similarity of taste existed
between us. He had so much to be proud of, and so many reasons for being
happy, that his excessive and shrinking modesty struck me as something
more than admirable. The day for our marriage being fixed, he seemed to
delight in anticipating every wish I could form for the future, and,
when sometimes I alluded to the deep melancholy which at times
possessed him, and begged to know the cause, he would speak of his
deceased parents, and of the delight it would have afforded them to see
him married, to their hearts' dearest wish, to one so justly approved
both by his own judgment and affections, I could not well find fault
with reasons so complimentary to myself. M. d'Harville easily guessed
the terms on which I must have been living with my father and Madame
Roland, although the former, delighted at my marriage, which would serve
as a plea for accelerating his own, had latterly treated me with
excessive tenderness. In some of our conversations, M. d'Harville, with
infinite tact and good feeling, explained to me that his regard was
considerably heightened by the knowledge of all I had suffered since my
dear mother's death. I thought it my duty to hint to him, at such a
time, that, as my father was about to marry again, it might very
possibly affect the property I might be expected to inherit. He would
not even permit me to proceed, but most effectually convinced me of his
own utterly disinterested motives in seeking my hand. I could not but
think that the families, who had so abruptly broken off his former
projected alliances, must have been very unreasonable or avaricious
people if they made pecuniary matters a stumbling-block with one so
generous, easy, and liberal as M. d'Harville."

"And such as you describe him, so have I always found him," cried
Rodolph; "all heart, disinterestedness, and delicacy! But did you never
speak to him of the marriages so hastily broken off?"

"I will confess to you, my lord, that the question was several times on
my lips; but, when I recollected the sensitiveness of his nature, I
feared to pain him by questions which might, at any rate, have wounded
his self-love, or taxed his honour to reply to truly. The nearer the day
fixed for our marriage approached, the more delighted did M. d'Harville
appear. Yet I several times detected him absorbed in the most perfect
dejection, the deepest melancholy. One day, in particular, I caught his
eyes fixed on me with a settled gaze, as though resolving to confide to
me some important secret he yet could not bring himself to reveal. I
perceived a large tear trickle slowly down his cheek, as though wrung
from his very heart. The recollection of his two former prospects of
marriage, so suddenly destroyed, rose to my mind; and, I confess, I
almost felt afraid to proceed. A vague presentiment whispered within me
that the happiness of my whole life was at stake,--perhaps perilled for
ever. But then, on the other hand, such was my eager desire to quit my
father's house, that I turned a deaf ear to every suggestion of evil
arising from my union with M. d'Harville."

"And did M. d'Harville make you no voluntary confession?"

"Not any. When I inquired the cause of his continual fits of melancholy,
he would answer, 'Pray, do not heed it! But I am always most sad when
most happy.' These words, pronounced in the kindest and most touching
manner, reassured me a little. And how, indeed, was it possible, when
his voice would quiver with emotion, and his eyes fill with tears, to
manifest any further suspicion, by repeating my questions as to the
past, when it was with the future only I had any business? The persons
appointed to witness the contract on the part of M. d'Harville, M. de
Lucenay and M. de Saint-Rémy, arrived at Aubiers some days previous to
the marriage; my nearest relations alone were invited. Immediately after
the conclusion of the ceremony, we were to depart for Paris; and it is
true I felt for M. d'Harville none of that love with which a young wife
ought to regard the man she vows her future life to, but I admired and
respected his character and disposition, and, but for the disastrous
events which followed this fatal union, a more tender feeling could
doubtless soon have attached me to him. Well, we were married."

At these words, Madame d'Harville turned rather pale, and her resolution
appeared to forsake her. After a pause, she resumed:

"Immediately after the ceremony, my father embraced me tenderly, as did
Madame Roland also. Before so many persons I could not avoid the display
of this fresh exhibition of hypocrisy. With her dry and white hand she
squeezed mine so hard as to pain me, and said, in a whisper, and in a
tone as gentle as it was perfidious, these words, which I never can
forget: 'Think of me sometimes in the midst of your bliss, for it was I
who arranged your marriage.' Alas, I was far from comprehending at that
moment the full force of those words! Our marriage took place at eleven
o'clock, and we immediately entered our carriage, followed by my
waiting-woman and the old _valet de chambre_ of M. d'Harville's, and we
travelled so rapidly that we reached Paris before ten o'clock in the
evening. I should have been surprised at the silence and melancholy of
M. d'Harville had I not known that he had what he termed his happy
sadness. I was myself painfully disturbed; I was returning to Paris for
the first time since my mother's death; I arrived there alone with my
husband, whom I had hardly known more than six weeks, and who, up to the
evening before, had not addressed a word to me but what was marked by
respectful formality. Men, however well bred, do not think sufficiently
of the fear which the sudden change in their tone and manners occasions
to a young female as soon as she belongs to them; they do not reflect
that a youthful maiden cannot in a few hours forget all her timidity and
virgin scruples."

"Nothing is to me more barbarous than this system of carrying off a
young female as soon as the wedding ceremony is over,--a ceremony which
ought to consecrate the right and duty to employ still more every
tenderness of love and effort to render mutual affection still stronger
and more endearing."

"You will imagine, monseigneur, the indefinable alarm with which I found
myself in Paris,--in the city in which my mother had died hardly a year
before. We reached the Hôtel d'Harville--"

The emotion of the young lady redoubled, her cheeks were flushed with
scarlet, and she added, in a voice scarcely intelligible:

"You must know all; if not, I shall appear too contemptible in your
eyes. Well, then," she resumed, with desperate resolution, "I was led to
my apartment and left there alone; after an hour M. d'Harville joined me
there. I was weeping bitterly. My husband came towards me, and was about
to take my arm, when he fell at my feet in agony. He could not hear my
voice, his countenance was spasmodic with fearful convulsions, his eyes
rolled in their orbits with a rapidity that appalled me, his contorted
mouth was filled with blood and foam, and his hand grasped me with
inconceivable force. I made a desperate effort, and his stiffened
fingers at length unclasped from my wrist, and I fainted at the moment
when M. d'Harville was struggling in the paroxysm of this horrible
attack. This was my wedding night, my lord,--this was the vengeance of
Madame Roland!"

"Unhappy woman!" said Rodolph, overwhelmed. "I understand,--an
epileptic. Ah, 'tis horrible!"

"And that is not all," added Clémence, in a voice almost choked by
emotion; "my child, my angel girl, she has inherited this frightful
malady."

"Your daughter! She! What? Her paleness--her weakness--"

"Is, I dread to believe, hereditary; and the physicians think,
therefore, that it is incurable."

Madame d'Harville hid her face in her hands; overcome by this painful
disclosure, she had not courage to add another word. Rodolph also
remained silent. His mind recoiled affrighted from the terrible
mysteries of this night. He pictured to himself the young maiden,
already sad, in consequence of her return to the city in which her
mother had died, arriving at a strange house, alone with a man for whom
she felt an interest and esteem, but not love, nor any of those
sentiments which enchant the mind, none of the engrossing feeling which
removes the chaste alarms of a woman in the participation of a lawful
and reciprocal affection. No, no; on the contrary, Clémence arrived
agitated and distressed, with depressed spirits and tearful eyes. She
was, however, resolved on resignation and the fulfilment of duty, when,
instead of listening to language full of devotion, love, and tenderness,
which would compensate for the sorrowful feelings which were uppermost
in her mind, she sees convulsed at her feet a stricken man, who twists,
and foams, and shrieks, in the hideous convulsions of one of the most
fearful infirmities with which a man can be incurably smitten! This is
not all: his child, poor little innocent angel! is also withered from
her birth. These sad and painful avowals excited bitter reflections in
Rodolph's mind. "Such," said he, "is the law of the land. A young,
handsome, and pure girl, the confiding and gentle victim of a shameful
dissimulation, unites her destiny to that of a man tainted with an
incurable malady,--a fatal inheritance which he will assuredly transmit
to his children. The unhappy wife discovers this horrid mystery. What
can she do? Nothing,--nothing but suffer and weep; nothing but endeavour
to overcome her disgust and fright; nothing but pass her days in
anguish, in indefinable and endless terror; nothing but seek, perhaps,
culpable consolation without the desolate existence which has been
created around her. Again," said Rodolph, "these strange laws sometimes
produce horrible unions: fearful for humanity. In these laws, animals
always appear superior to man in the care bestowed upon them; in the
improvements that are studied for them; in the protection which
encircles, the guarantees which attend them. Buy an animal, and, if an
infirmity decried by the law is detected after the purchase, the sale is
null and void. Indeed, what a shame, what a case of public injury would
it be to compel a man to keep an animal which has a cough, is lame, or
has lost an eye! Why, it would be scandalous, criminal, unheard-of
infamy! Only imagine being compelled to keep, and keep for ever, a mule
with a cough, a horse that was blind, or an ass that was lame! What
frightful consequences might not such injustice entail on the community!
Therefore, no such bargains hold good, no words bind, no contract is
valid: the omnipotent law unlooses all that was thus bound. But if it
relates to a creature made after God's own image, if it respects a young
girl who, in the full and innocent reliance on the good faith of a man,
unites her lot with his, and wakes up in the company of an epileptic, an
unhappy wretch stricken with a fearful malady, whose moral and physical
consequences are immeasurably distressing, a malady which may throw
disorder and aversion into a family, perpetuate a horrible disease,
vitiate whole generations, yes, this law, so inexorable when lame,
blind, or coughing animals are the consideration--this law, so
singularly clear-sighted, which will not allow an unsound horse to
increase the species--this law will not loosen the victim of a union
such as we have described. These bonds are sacred, indissoluble: it is
to offend God and man to break them. In truth," continued Rodolph, "men
sometimes display a humility most shameful and an egotistical pride
which is only execrable. He values himself at less than the beast which
he protects by warranties which he refuses for himself; and he imposes
on himself, makes sacred, and perpetuates his most distressing
infirmities by putting them under the protection of the immutability of
laws, human and divine." Rodolph greatly blamed M. d'Harville, but he
promised to himself to excuse him in the eyes of Clémence, although
fully persuaded, after her sad disclosure, that the marquis was for ever
alienated from her heart. One thought led to another, and Rodolph said
to himself, "I have kept aloof from a woman I love, and who, perhaps,
already feels a secret inclination for me. Either from an attachment of
heart or friendship, she has bestowed her honour--her life--for the sake
of a fool whom she thought unhappy. If, instead of leaving her, I had
paid her all sorts of attentions, love, and consideration, my name would
have been such that her reputation would not have received the slightest
stain, the suspicions of her husband would never have been excited:
whilst, now, she is all but at the mercy of such an ass as M. Charles
Robert, who, I fear, will become the more indiscreet in proportion as he
has the less right to be so. And then, too, who knows if, in spite of
the dangers she has risked, the heart of Madame d'Harville will always
remain free? Any return to her husband is henceforward impossible.
Young, handsome, courted, with a disposition sympathising with all who
suffer, what dangers, what shoals and quicksands, lie before her! For M.
d'Harville, what anguish and what deep chagrin! At the same time jealous
of and in love with his wife, who cannot subdue the disgust and fright
which he excited in her on their nuptials,--what a lot is his!"

Clémence, with her forehead hidden by her hands, her eyes brimful of
tears, and her cheek reddened by embarrassment, avoided Rodolph's look,
such pain had the disclosure cost her.

"Ah, now," said Rodolph, after a long silence, "I can understand the
cause of M. d'Harville's sadness, which I could not before account for.
I can imagine his regrets--"

"His regrets!" exclaimed Clémence; "say his remorse, monseigneur, if he
have any, for never was such a crime more coolly meditated."

"A crime, madame?"

"What else is it, my lord, to bind to yourself in indissoluble bonds a
young girl, who confides in your honour, when you are fatally stricken
with a malady which inspires fear and horror? What else is it, to devote
with certainty an unhappy child to similar misery? What forced M.
d'Harville to make two victims? A blind, insensate passion? No; he found
my birth, my fortune, and my person, to his taste. He wished to make a
convenient marriage, because, doubtless, a bachelor's life wearied him."

"Madame, at least pity him."

"Pity him? If you wish pity, pray let it be bestowed on my child. Poor
victim of this odious union, what nights and days have I passed near
her! What tears have not her misfortunes wrung from me!"

"But her father suffers from the same unmerited afflictions."

"Yet it is that father who has condemned her to a sickly infancy, a
withering youth, and, if she should survive, to a life of isolation and
misery, for she will never marry. Ah, no! I love her too well to expose
her to the chance of one day's weeping over her own offspring, similarly
smitten, as I weep over her. I have suffered too much from treachery, to
render myself guilty of, or an accomplice in, such wickedness!"

"You are right; the vengeance of your mother-in-law was really
atrocious. But patience, and perhaps in your turn you will be avenged,"
said Rodolph, after a moment's reflection.

"What do you mean, my lord?" inquired Clémence, astonished at the change
in his voice.

"I have generally had the satisfaction of seeing those whom I have known
to be wicked most severely punished," he replied, in a voice that made
Clémence shudder. "But the day after this unhappy event what did your
husband say?"

"He confessed, with singular candour, that his two former marriages had
been broken off in consequence of the families becoming acquainted with
the secret of his fearful malady. Thus, then, after having been twice
rejected, he had the shameful, the unmanly courage, to drag a third poor
victim into the abyss of misery the kind intervention of friends had
preserved the others from. And this is what the world calls a gentleman
and a man of honour!"

"For one so good, so full of pity to others, yours are harsh words."

"Because I feel I have been unworthily treated. M. d'Harville easily
penetrated the girlish openness of my character; why, then, did he not
trust to my sympathy and generosity of feeling, and tell me the whole
truth?"

"Because you would have refused him."

"This very expression proves how guilty he was, and how treacherous was
his conduct, if he really entertained the idea of my rejecting his hand
if informed of the truth!"

"He loved you too well to incur the risk of losing you."

"No, no, my lord; had he really loved me, he would never have sacrificed
me to his selfish passion. Nay, so wretched was my position at that
time, and such was my desire to quit my father's roof, that, had he been
candid and explicit with me, it is more than probable he would have
moved me to pity the species of misery he was condemned to endure, and
to sympathise with one so cut off from the tender ties which sweeten
life. I really believe, at this moment, that, touched by his open, manly
confession, as well as interested for one labouring under so severe an
infliction of the Almighty's hand, I should scarcely have had the
courage to refuse him my hand; and, once aware of all I had undertaken,
nothing should have deterred me from the full and conscientious
discharge of every solemn duty towards him. But to compel this pity and
interest, merely because he had me in his power, and to exact my
consideration and sympathy, because, unhappily, I was his wife, and had
sworn to obligations, the full force of which had been concealed from
me, was at once the act of a coward and a wrong-judging mind. How could
I hold myself bound to endure the heavy penalties of my unfortunate
marriage, when my husband had trampled on every tie which binds an
honourable mind? And now, my lord, you may form some little idea of my
wedded life; you are now aware how shamefully I was deceived, and that,
too, by the person in whose hands I unsuspectingly placed the future
happiness of my whole existence. I had implicitly trusted in M.
d'Harville, and he had most dishonourably and treacherously repaid my
trustfulness with bitter and irremediable wrongs. The gentle, timid
melancholy which had so greatly interested me in his favour, and which
he attributed to pious recollections, was, in truth, only the workings
of a conscience ill at ease, and the knowledge of his own incurable
infirmity."

"Still, were he a stranger or an enemy, a heart so noble and generous as
yours would pity such sufferings as he endures?"

"But can I calm those sufferings? If he could distinguish my voice, or
if only a look of recognition answered my sorrowing glance! But no. Oh,
my lord, it is impossible for such as have never seen them to form an
idea of those frightful paroxysms, in which every sense is suspended,
and the unfortunate sufferer merely recovers from his frenzy to fall
into a sort of sullen dejection! When my dear child experiences one of
these attacks, it almost breaks my heart to see her tender frame
twisted, stiffened, and distorted, by the dreadful convulsions which
accompany it. Still, she is my own, my beloved infant, and, when I see
her bitter agonies, my hatred and aversion to her father are increased
an hundredfold. But, when my poor child becomes calmer, so does my
irritation against my husband subside also; and then--ah, then--the
natural tenderness of my heart makes my angry feelings give place to a
species of sorrow and pity for him. Yet surely I did not marry at only
seventeen years of age merely to experience the alternations of hatred
and painful commiseration, and to weep over a frail and sickly infant,
whom, after all, I may not be permitted to rear. And, as regards this
beloved object of my incessant prayers, permit me, my lord, to
anticipate a reproach I doubtless deserve, and which you would be
unwilling to make. My daughter, young as she is, is capable of
interesting my affections and fully occupying my heart; but the love she
inspires is so cruelly mixed with present anguish and future
apprehensions, that my tenderness for my child invariably ends in tears
and bitter grief. When I am with her, my heart is torn with agony, a
heavy, crushing weight presses on my heart at the thoughts of her
hopeless, suffering state. Not all the fondest devices of a mother's
love can overcome a malady pronounced by all our faculty as incurable.
Thus, then, by way of relief and refuge from the atmosphere of
wretchedness which surrounded me, I had pictured to myself the
possibility of finding calm and repose for my troubled spirit in an
attachment, so vain, so empty, that--But I have been deceived a second
time, most unworthily deceived; and there is now nothing left for me but
to resign myself to the gloom and misery of the life my husband's want
of candour has entailed upon me. But tell me, my lord, is it such an
existence as I was justified in expecting when I bestowed my hand on M.
d'Harville? And am I alone to blame for those injuries, to avenge which
my husband had this day determined to take my life? My fault was great,
very great; and the more so, because the object I had selected was every
way so unworthy, and leaves me the additional shame of having to blush
for my choice. Happily for me, my lord, the conversation you overheard
between the Countess Sarah and her brother on the subject of M. Charles
Robert spares me much of the humiliation I should otherwise have
experienced in making this confession. I only venture to hope that,
since listening to my relation, you may be induced to consider me as
much an object of pity as I admit I am of blame."

"I cannot express to you, madame, how deeply your narrative has touched
me. What gnawing grief, what hidden sorrows have you not been called
upon to endure, from the death of your mother to the birth of your
child! Who would ever believe such ills could reach one so envied, so
admired, and so calculated to enjoy and impart happiness to others?"

"Oh, my lord, there are some sorrows so deep, so unapproachable, that
for worlds we would not even have them suspected; and the severest
increase of suffering would arise from the very doubt of our being the
enviable creatures we are believed to be."

"You are right; nothing would be more painful than the question, openly
expressed, 'Is she or he as happy as they seem to be?' Still, if there
is any happiness in the knowledge, be assured you are not the only one
who has to struggle with the fearful contrast between reality and that
which the world believes."

"How so, my lord?"

"Because, in the eyes of all who know you, your husband is esteemed even
happier than yourself, since he possesses one so rich in every good
gift; and yet is not he also much to be pitied? Can there be a more
miserable existence than the one he leads? He has acted unfairly and
selfishly towards you, but has he not been bitterly punished? He loves
you with a passion, deep and sincere, worthy of you to have inspired,
yet he knows that your only feeling towards him is insurmountable
aversion and contempt. In his feeble, suffering child he beholds a
constant reproach; nor is that all he is called upon to endure;
jealousy also assails him with her nameless tortures."

"And how can I help that, my lord? By giving him no occasion for
jealousy, you reply. And certainly you are right. But, think you,
because no other person would possess my love, it would any the more be
his? He knows full well it would not. Since the fearful scene I related
to you, we have lived entirely apart, while in the eyes of the world I
have kept up every necessary appearance of married happiness. With the
exception of yourself, my lord, I have never breathed a syllable of this
fatal secret to mortal ears: thus, therefore, I venture to ask advice of
you I could not solicit from any human being."

"And I, madame, can with truth assure you that, if the trifling service
I have rendered you be deemed worthy of notice, I hold myself a thousand
times overpaid by the confidence you have reposed in me. But, since you
deign to ask my advice, and permit me to speak candidly--"

"Oh, yes, my lord, I beseech you to use the frankness and sincerity you
would show to a sister!"

"Then allow me to tell you that, for want of employing one of your most
precious qualities, you lose vast enjoyments, which would not only fill
up that void in your heart, but would distract you from your domestic
sorrows and supply that need of stirring emotions, excitement, and,"
added the prince, smiling, "I dare almost to venture to add,--pray
forgive me for having so bad an opinion of your sex,--that natural love
for mystery and intrigue which exercises so powerful an empire over
many, if not all, females."

"What do you mean, my lord?"

"I mean that, if you would play at the game of doing good, nothing would
please or interest you more."

Madame d'Harville surveyed Rodolph with astonishment.

"And understand," resumed he, "I speak not of sending large sums
carelessly, almost disdainfully, to unfortunate creatures, of whom you
know nothing, and who are frequently undeserving of your favour. But if
you would amuse yourself, as I do, at playing, from time to time, at the
game of Providence, you would acknowledge that occasionally our good
deeds put on all the piquancy and charms of a romance."

"I must confess, my lord," said Clémence, with a smile, "it never
occurred to me to class charity under the head of amusements."

"It is a discovery I owe to my horror of all tediums, all wearisome,
long-protracted affairs,--a sort of horror which has been principally
inspired by long political conferences and ministerial discussions. But
to return to our game of amusing beneficence: I cannot, alas, aspire to
possess that disinterested virtue which makes some people content to
entrust others with the office of either ill or well distributing their
bounty, and, if it merely required me to send one of my chamberlains to
carry a few hundred louis to each of the divisions in and around Paris,
I confess, to my shame, that the scheme would not interest me nearly as
much as it does at present, while doing good, after my notions on the
subject, is one of the most entertaining and exciting amusements you can
imagine. I prefer the word 'amusing,' because to me it conveys the idea
of all that pleases, charms, and allures us. And, really, madame, if you
would only become my accomplice in a few dark intrigues of this sort,
you would see that, apart from the praiseworthiness of the action,
nothing is really more curious, inviting, attractive, or diverting, than
these charitable adventures. And then, what mystery is requisite to
conceal the benefits we render! what precautions to prevent ourselves
from being discovered! what varied, yet powerful, emotions are excited
at the aspect of poor but worthy people shedding tears of joy and
calling down Heaven's blessing on your head! Depend upon it, such a
group is, after all, more gratifying than the pale, angry countenance of
either a jealous or an unfaithful lover, and there are very few who do
not class either under one head or the other. The emotions I describe
are closely allied to those you experienced this morning while going to
the Rue du Temple. Simply dressed, that you may escape observation, you
go forth with a palpitating heart; you also ascend with a throbbing
breast some modest _fiacre_, carefully drawing down the blinds to
prevent yourself from being seen; then, looking cautiously from side to
side that you are not observed, you quickly enter a mean-looking
dwelling, just like this morning, you see, the only difference being
that, whereas to-day you said, 'If I am discovered I am lost!' then you
would only smile as you mentally uttered, 'If I am discovered, they will
overwhelm me with praises and blessings!' Now, since you possess your
many adorable qualities in all their pure modesty, you would employ the
most artful schemes, the most complicated manoeuvres, to prevent
yourself from being known, and, consequently, wept over and blessed as
an angel of goodness."

"Ah, my lord," cried Madame d'Harville, deeply moved, "you are indeed my
preserver! I cannot express the new ideas, the consoling hopes, awakened
within me by your words. You are quite right; to endeavour to gain the
blessing and gratitude of such as are poor and in misery is almost equal
to being loved even as I would wish to be; nay, it is even superior in
its purity and absence of self. When I compare the existence I now
venture to anticipate with the shameful and degraded lot I was preparing
for myself, my own reproaches become more bitter and severe."

"I should, indeed, be grieved," said Rodolph, smiling, "were that to be
the case, since all my desire is to make you forget the past, and to
prove to you that there are various modes of recreating and distracting
our minds; the means of good and evil are very frequently nearly the
same: it is the end, only, which differs. In a word, if good is as
attractive, as amusing, as evil, why should we prefer the latter? I am
going to use a very commonplace and hackneyed simile. Why do many women
take as lovers men not nearly as worthy of that distinction as their own
husbands? Because the greatest charm of love consists in the
difficulties which surround it; for once deprived of the hopes, the
fears, the anxieties, difficulties, mysteries, and dangers, and little
or nothing would remain, merely the lover, stripped of all the prestige
derivable from these causes, and a very every-day object he would
appear; very much after the fashion of the individual who, when asked by
a friend why he did not marry his mistress, replied, 'Why, I was
thinking of it; but, if I did, where should I go to pass my evenings?'"

"Your picture is coloured after nature, my lord," said Madame
d'Harville, smiling.

"Well, then, if I can find the means of enabling you to experience the
fears, the anxieties, the excitement, which seem to have such charms for
you, if I can render useful your natural love for mystery and romance,
your inclination for dissimulation and artifice,--you see my bad opinion
of your sex will peep out in spite of me," added Rodolph, gaily,--"shall
I not change into fine and generous qualities instincts which otherwise
are mere ungovernable and unmanageable impulses, excellent, if well
employed, most fatal, if directed badly? Now, then, what do you say?
Shall we get up all manner of benevolent plots and charitable
dissipations? We will have our rendezvous, our correspondence, our
secrets, and, above all, we will carefully conceal all our doings from
the marquis, for your visit of to-day to the Morels has, in all
probability, excited his suspicions. There, you see, it only requires
your consent to commence a regular intrigue."

"I accept with joy and gratitude the mysterious associations you
propose, my lord," said Clémence; "and, by way of beginning our romance,
I will return to-morrow to visit those poor creatures to whom,
unfortunately, this morning I could only utter a few words of
consolation; for, taking advantage of my terror and alarm, the purse you
so thoughtfully supplied me with was stolen from me by a lame boy as I
ascended the stairs. Ah, my lord," added Clémence (and her countenance
lost the expression of gentle gaiety by which a few minutes before it
was animated), "if you only knew what misery, what a picture of
wretchedness--no! oh, no! I never could have believed so horrid a scene,
or that such want existed; and yet I bewail my condition and complain of
my severe destiny."

Rodolph, wishing to conceal from Madame d'Harville how deeply he was
touched at this application of the woes of others, as teaching patience
and resignation, yet fully recognising in the meek and subdued spirit
the fine and noble qualities of her mind, said, gaily:

"With your permission, I shall except the Morels from your jurisdiction;
you shall resign them to my care, and, above all things, promise me not
again to enter that miserable place, for, to tell you the truth, I live
there."

"You, my lord? What an idea!"

"Nay, but you really must believe me when I say I live there, for it is
actually true. I confess mine is somewhat a humble lodging, a mere
matter of eight pounds a year, in addition to which I pay the large and
liberal sum of six francs a month to the porteress, Madame Pipelet, that
ugly old woman you saw; but, to make up for all this, I have as my next
neighbour, Mlle. Rigolette, the prettiest grisette in the Quartier du
Temple. And you must allow that, for a merchant's clerk, with a salary
of only seventy-two pounds a year (I pass as a clerk), such a domicile
is well suited to my means."

"Your unhoped-for presence in that fatal house proves to me that you are
speaking seriously, my lord; some generous action leads you there, no
doubt! But what good action do you reserve for me? What part do you
propose for me to sustain?"

"That of an angel of consolation, and--pray excuse and allow me the
word--a very demon of cunning and manoeuvres! For there are some
wounds so painful, as well as delicate, that the hand of a woman only
can watch over and heal them. There are, also, unfortunate beings so
proud, so reserved, and so hidden from observation, that it requires
uncommon penetration to discover them, and an irresistible charm to win
their confidence."

"And when shall I have an opportunity of displaying the penetration and
skill for which you give me credit?" asked Madame d'Harville,
impatiently.

"Soon, I hope, you will have to make a conquest worthy of you; but, to
succeed, you must employ all your most ingenious resources."

"And when, my lord, will you confide this great secret to me?"

"Let me see! You perceive, we have already got as far as arranging our
rendezvous. Could you do me the favour to grant me an audience in four
days' time?"

"Dear me! so long first?" said Clémence, innocently.

"But what would become of the mystery of the affair, and all the strict
forms and appearances necessary to be kept up, if we were to meet
sooner? Just imagine! If our partnership were suspected, people would be
on their guard, and we should seldom achieve our purpose. I may very
probably have to write to you. Who was that aged female who brought me
your note?"

"An old servant of my mother's, the very personification of prudence and
discretion."

"I will then address my letters under cover to her, and she will
deliver them into your hands. If you are kind enough to return any
answer, address 'To M. Rodolph, Rue Plumet,' and let your maid put your
letters in the post."

"I will do that myself, my lord, when taking my usual morning's walk."

"Do you often walk out alone?"

"In fine weather nearly every day."

"That's right! It is a custom all young women should observe from the
very earliest period of their marriage,--either from a good or an
improper provision against future evil. The habit once established, it
becomes what the lawyers style a precedent; and, in subsequent days,
these habitual promenades excite no dangerous interpretations. If I had
been a woman,--and, between ourselves, I fear I should have been very
charitable, but equally flighty,--the very day after my marriage I
should, in all possible innocence, have taken the most mysterious steps,
and, with perfect simplicity, have involved myself in all manner of
suspicious and compromising proceedings, for the purpose of establishing
the precedent I spoke of, in order to be at liberty either to visit my
poor pensioners or to meet my lover."

"But that would be downright perfidy to one's husband, would it not, my
lord?" said Madame d'Harville, smiling.

"Fortunately for you, madame, you have never been driven to the
necessity of admitting the utility of such provisionary measures."

Madame d'Harville's smile left her lips. She cast down her eyes, and,
blushing deeply, said, in a low and sad voice, "This is not generous, my
lord!"

At first Rodolph regarded the marquise with astonishment, then added, "I
understand you, madame. But, once for all, let us weigh well your
position as regards M. Charles Robert. I will just imagine that one of
your acquaintances may one day have pointed out to you one of those
pitiable-looking mendicants who roll their eyes most sentimentally, and
play on the clarionet with desperate energy, to awaken the sympathy of
the passers-by. 'That is really and truly a genuine case of distress,'
observes your friend. 'That interesting musician has at least seven
children, and a wife deaf, dumb, blind,' etc. 'Ah, poor fellow!' you
reply, charitably aiding him with your purse. And so, each time you meet
this case of genuine distress, the clarionet-player, the moment he
discerns you from afar, fixes his imploring eyes upon you, while the
most touching strains of his instrument are directed to touch your
charitable sympathies, and that, too, so successfully, that again your
purse opens at this fresh appeal. One day, more than usually disposed to
pity this very unfortunate object by the importunities of the friend who
first pointed him out to you, and who is most wickedly abusing your
generous heart, you resolve to visit this case of genuine distress, as
your false friend terms it, and to behold the poor object of your
solicitude in the midst of his misery. Well, you go. But, lo! the
grief-stricken musician has vanished; and in his place you find a
lively, rollicking fellow, enjoying himself over some of the good things
of this world, and mirthfully carolling forth the last new alehouse
catch. Then disgust succeeds to pity; for you have bestowed your
sympathy and charity alike upon an impostor, neither more nor less. Is
it not so?"

Madame d'Harville could not restrain a smile at this singular apologue.
She, however, soon checked it, as she added:

"However grateful I may feel for this mode of justifying my great
imprudence, my lord, I can but confess I dare not avail myself of so
favourable a pretext as that of mistaken charity."

"Yet, after all, yours was an error based upon motives of noble and
generous pity for the wounded feelings of one you believed a genuine
object for commiseration. Fortunately, there are so many ways left you
of atoning for one indiscretion, that your regret need be but small.
Shall I not have the pleasure of seeing M. d'Harville this evening?"

"No, my lord. The scene of this morning has so much affected him that he
is--ill," said the marquise, in a low, tremulous tone.

"Ah," replied Rodolph, sadly, "I understand! Come, courage! you were
saying that you required an aim, a motive, a means of directing your
thoughts. Permit me to hope that all this will be accomplished by
following out the plan I have proposed. Your heart will be then so
filled with the delightful recollection of all the happiness you have
caused, and all the good you have effected, that, in all probability,
you will find no room for resentment against your husband. In place of
angry feelings, you will regard him with the same sorrowing pity you
look on your dear child. And as for the interesting little creature
herself, now you have confided to me the cause of her delicate health, I
almost think myself warranted in bidding you yet to entertain hopes of
overcoming the fearful complaint which has hitherto affected her tender
frame."

"Oh, my lord!" exclaimed Clémence, clasping her hands with eagerness,
"can it be possible? How? In what manner can my child be saved?"

"I have, as physician to myself and household, a man almost unknown,
though possessed of a first-rate science. Great part of his life was
passed in America; and I remember his speaking to me of some marvellous
cures performed by him on slaves attacked by this distressing
complaint."

"And do you really think, my lord--"

"Nay, you must not allow yourself to dwell too confidently upon success;
the disappointment would be so very severe. Only, do not let us wholly
despair."

Clémence d'Harville cast a hasty glance of unutterable gratitude over
the noble features of Rodolph, the firm, unflinching friend, who
reconciled her to herself with so much good sense, intelligence, and
delicacy of feeling. Then she asked herself how, for one instant, she
could ever have been interested in the fate of such a being as M.
Charles Robert,--the very idea was hateful to her.

"What do I not owe you, my lord?" cried she, in a voice of thrilling
emotion; "you console me for the past; you open to me a glimpse of hope
for my child; and you place before me a plan of future occupation which
shall afford me both consolation and the delight of doing my duty. Ah,
was I not right when I said that, if you would come here to-night, you
would finish the day as you had begun it,--by performing a good action?"

"And pray, madame, do not omit to add,--an action after my own heart,
where all is pleasure and unmixed enjoyment in its performance. And now,
adieu!" said Rodolph, rising as the clock struck half-past eleven.

"Adieu, my lord, and pray do not forget to send me news ere long of
those poor people in the Rue du Temple."

"I will see them to-morrow, for, unfortunately, I knew not of that
little limping rascal having stolen your purse; and I fear that the
unhappy creatures are in the most deplorable want. Have the kindness to
bear in mind that, in the course of four days, I shall come to explain
to you the nature of the part you will be required to undertake. One
thing I must prepare you for; and that is, the probability of its being
requisite for you to assume a disguise on the occasion."

"A disguise? Oh, how charming! What sort of one, my lord?"

"I cannot tell you at present. I will leave the choice to you."

       *       *       *       *       *

"All that is requisite," said the prince, on his return home, "to save
this excellent woman from the perils of another attachment, is to fill
her mind with generous thoughts; and, since an invincible repugnance
separates her from her husband, to employ her love for the romantic in
such charitable actions as shall require being enshrouded in mystery."




CHAPTER XII.

MISERY.


The reader has probably not forgotten that the garret in the Rue du
Temple was occupied by an unfortunate family, the father of whom was a
working lapidary, named Morel. We shall now endeavour to describe the
wretched abode of Morel and his children.

It was six o'clock in the morning; a deep silence dwelt around. The
streets were still deserted, for the snow fell fast, and the cold,
biting wind froze as it blew. A miserable candle, stuck upon a small
block of wood, and supported by two slips of the same material, scarcely
penetrated with its yellow, flickering light the misty darkness of the
garret,--a narrow, low-built place, two-thirds of which was formed by
the sloping roof, which communicated by a sharp angle with the wretched
flooring, and freely exposed the moss-covered tiles of the outer roof.
Walls covered with plaster, blackened by time, and split into countless
crevices, displayed the rotten, worm-eaten laths, which formed the frail
division from other chambers, while in one corner of this deplorable
habitation a door off the hinges opened upon a narrow staircase. The
ground, of a nameless colour, but foul, fetid, and slippery, was partly
strewed with bits of dirty straw, old rags, and bones, the residue of
that unwholesome and vitiated food sold by the dealers in condemned
meat, and frequently bought by starving wretches, for the purpose of
gnawing the few cartilages that may adhere.[4]

  [4] It is no uncommon thing to meet, in densely crowded parts
  of Paris, with persons who openly sell the flesh of animals born
  dead, as well as of others who have died of disease, etc.

So wretched a condition either arises from improvidence and vice, or
from unavoidable misery,--misery so great, so overwhelming and
paralysing, as to enfeeble every energy, and to render the unhappy
object of it too hopeless, too despairing, even to attempt to extricate
himself from the squalor of his utter destitution, and he crouches in
his dirt and desolation like an animal in its den.

During the day, Morel's garret was lighted by a species of long, narrow
skylight formed in the descending roof, framed and glazed, and made to
open and shut by means of a pulley and string; but, at the hour which we
are describing, a heavy fall of snow encumbered the window, and
effectually prevented its affording any light. The candle placed on
Morel's working-table, which stood in the centre of the chamber,
diffused a kind of halo of pale, sickly beams, which, gradually
diminishing, was at last lost in the dim shadow which overspread the
place, in whose murky duskiness might be seen the faint outline of
several white-looking masses. On the work-table, which was merely a
heavy and roughly cut wooden block of unpolished oak, covered with
grease and soot, lay, loosely scattered about, a handful of rubies and
diamonds, of more than ordinary size and brilliancy, while, as the mean
rays of the small candle were reflected on them, they glittered and
sparkled like so many coruscating fires.

Morel was a worker of real stones, and not false ones, as he had given
out, and as was universally believed, in the Rue du Temple. Thanks to
this innocent deception, the costly jewels entrusted to him were merely
supposed to be so many pieces of glass, too valueless to tempt the
cupidity of any one. Such riches, confided to the care of one as poor
and miserably destitute as Morel, will render any reference to the
honesty of his character quite unnecessary.

Seated on a high stool, and wholly overcome by fatigue, cold, and
weariness, after a long winter's night, passed in unceasing labour, the
poor lapidary had fallen asleep on his block, with his head upon his
half-frozen arms, and his forehead resting against a small grindstone,
placed horizontally on the table, and generally put in motion by a
little hand-wheel, while a fine steel saw, and various other tools
belonging to his trade, were lying beside him. The man himself, of whom
nothing but the skull, surrounded by a fringe of gray hairs, was
visible, was dressed in a shabby fustian jacket, without any species of
linen or garment beneath it, and an old pair of cloth trousers, while
his worn-out slippers scarcely concealed the blue, cold feet they
partially covered, from resting solely on the damp, shiny floor; and so
bitter, so freezing, was the sharp winter wind which freely entered into
this scarcely human dwelling, that, spite of the weariness and
exhaustion of the overworked artisan, his frame shuddered and shivered
with involuntary frequency. The length of the wick of the unsnuffed
candle bespoke the length of time even this uneasy slumber must have
lasted, and no sound save his troubled and irregular breathing broke the
deathlike silence that prevailed; for, alas! the other occupants of this
mean abode were not so fortunate as to be able to forget their
sufferings in sleep. Yet this narrow, pent-up, unwholesome spot
contained no less than seven other persons,--five children, the youngest
of whom was four years of age, the eldest twelve, a sick and declining
wife, with an aged grandmother, the parent of Morel's wife, now in her
eightieth year, and an idiot!

The cold must have been intense, indeed, when the natural warmth of so
many persons, so closely packed together in so small a place, could not
in any way affect the freezing atmosphere; it was evident, therefore,
to speak scientifically, that but little caloric was given out by the
poor, weak, emaciated, shivering creatures, all suffering and almost
expiring with cold and hunger, from the puny infant to the idiotic old
grandmother.

With the exception of the father of the family, who had temporarily
yielded to the aching of his heavy eyelids, no other creature slept,--no
other; because cold, starvation, and sickness will not allow so sweet an
enjoyment as the closing the eyes in peaceful rest. Little does the
world believe how rarely comes that sound, healthful, and refreshing
slumber to the poor man's pillow, which at once invigorates the mind and
body, and sends the willing labourer back to his toil refreshed and
recruited by the blessing of a beneficent Creator. To taste of nature's
sweet, refreshing, balmy sleep, sickness, sorrow, poverty, and mental
disquietude must not share the humble pallet.

In contrasting the deep misery of the poor artisan, with whose woes we
are now occupying the reader, with the immense value of the jewelry
confided to him, we are struck by one of those comparisons which afflict
while they elevate the mind. With the distracting spectacle of his
family's want and wretchedness, embracing a wide field from cold and
hunger to drivelling idiocy, constantly before his eyes, this man, in
the pursuance of his daily labour, is compelled to touch and handle and
gaze upon bright and sparkling gems, the smallest of which would be a
mine of wealth to him, and save those dearest to him from sufferings and
privations which wring his very heart; would snatch them from the slow
and lingering death which is consuming them before his eyes. Yet, amid
all these trials and temptations, the artisan remains firmly, truly, and
unflinchingly honest, and would no more appropriate one of the
glittering stones entrusted to him than he would satisfy his hunger at
the expense of his starving babes. Doubtless the man but performed his
duty to his employer,--his simple duty; but because it is enjoined to
all to be honest and faithful in that which is committed to them, does
that render the action itself less noble, magnanimous, or praiseworthy?
Is not this unfortunate artisan, so courageously, so bravely upright and
honest while entrusted with the property of another, the type and model
of an immense class of working people, who, doomed to a life of
continual poverty and privation, see, with calm, patient looks,
thousands of their brethren rolling in splendour and abounding in
riches, yet they toil on, resigned and unenvying, but still
industriously striving for bread their hardest efforts cannot always
procure? And is there not something consolatory, as well as gratifying
to our feelings, to consider that it is neither force nor terror, but
good natural sense and a right mind which alone restrain this formidable
ocean, this heaving mass, whose bounds once broken, a moral inundation
would ensue, in which society itself would be swallowed up? Shall we,
then, refuse to cooperate with all the powers of our mind and body with
those generous and enlightened spirits, who ask but a little sunshine
for so much misfortune, courage, and resignation?

       *       *       *       *       *

Let us now return to the, alas! too true specimen of distressing want we
shall endeavour to describe in all its fearful and startling reality.

The lapidary possessed only a thin mattress and a portion of a blanket
appropriated to the old grandmother, who, in her stupid and ferocious
selfishness, would not allow any person to share them with her. In the
beginning of the winter she had become quite violent, and had even
attempted to strangle the youngest child, who had been put to sleep with
her. This poor infant was a sickly little creature, of about four years
old, now far gone in consumption, and who found it too cold inside the
mattress, where she slept with her brothers and sisters. Hereafter we
shall explain this mode of sleeping so frequently employed by the very
poor, in comparison with whom the very animals are treated luxuriously,
for their litter is changed. Such was the picture presented in the
humble garret of the poor lapidary, when the eye was enabled to pierce
the gloomy penumbra caused by the flickering rays of the candle. By the
side of the partition wall, not less damp and cracked than the others,
was placed on the floor the mattress on which the idiot grandmother
reposed; as she could not bear anything on her head, her white hair was
cut very short, and revealed the shape of her head and flat forehead;
while her shaggy, gray eyebrows shaded the deep orbits, from which
glared a wild, savage, yet crafty look; her pale, hollow, wrinkled
cheeks hung upon the bones of the face and the sharp angles of her jaws.
Lying upon her side, and almost doubled up, her chin nearly touching her
knees, she lay, shivering with cold, beneath the gray rug, too small to
cover her all over, and which, as she drew it over her shoulders,
exposed her thin, emaciated legs, as well as the wretched old petticoat
in which she was clad. An odour most fetid and repulsive issued from
this bed.

At a little distance from the mattress of the grandmother, and still
extending along the side of the wall, was placed the _paillasse_ which
served as a sleeping-place for the five children, who were accommodated
after the following manner:

An opening was made at each side of the cloth which covered the straw,
and the children were inserted into this bed, or, rather, foul and
noisome dunghill, the outer case serving both for sheet and counterpane.
Two little girls, one of whom was extremely ill, shivered on one side,
and three young boys on the other, all going to bed without undressing,
if, indeed, the miserable rags they wore could be termed clothes. Masses
of thick, dry, light hair, tangled, ragged, and uncombed, left uncut
because their poor mother fancied it helped to keep them warm, half
covered their pale, thin, pinched features. One of the boys drew, with
his cold, benumbed fingers, the covering over their straw bed up to his
chin, in order to defend himself from the cold; while another, fearful
of exposing his hands to the influence of the frost, tried to grasp the
bed-covering with his teeth, which rattled and shook in his head; while
a third strove to huddle up to his brothers in the hopes of gaining a
little warmth. The youngest of the two girls, fatally attacked by
consumption, leaned her poor little face, which already bore the hue of
death, languidly against the chilly bosom of her sister, a girl just one
year older, who vainly sought, by pressing her in her arms, to impart
comfort and ease to the little sufferer, over whom she watched with the
anxious solicitude of a parent.

On another _paillasse_, also placed on the ground, at the foot of that
of the children, the wife of the artisan was extended, groaning in
helpless exhaustion from the effects of a slow fever and an internal
complaint, which had not permitted her to quit her bed for several
months. Madeleine Morel was in her thirty-sixth year; a blue cotton
handkerchief, tied round her low forehead, made the bilious pallor of
her countenance and sharp, emaciated features still more conspicuous. A
dark halo encircled her hollow, sunken eyes, while her lips were split
and bleeding from the effects of the fever which consumed her; her
dejected, grief-worn physiognomy, and small, insignificant features,
indicated one of those gentle but weak natures, without resource or
energy, which unable to struggle with misfortunes, yield at once, and
know no remedy but vain and ceaseless lamentations and regrets. Weak,
spiritless, and of limited capacity, she had remained honest because her
husband was so; had she been left to herself, it is probable that
ignorance and misfortune might have depraved her mind and driven her to
any lengths. She loved her husband and her children, but she had neither
the courage nor resolution to restrain giving vent to loud and open
complaints respecting their mutual misery; and frequently was the
lapidary, whose unflinching labour alone maintained the family, obliged
to quit his work to console and pacify the poor valetudinarian. Over and
above an old ragged sheet of coarse brown cloth, which partially covered
his wife, Morel had, in order to impart a little warmth, laid a few old
clothes, so worn out, and patched and pieced, that the pawnbroker had
refused to have anything to do with them.

A stove, a saucepan, a damaged earthen stewpan, two or three cracked
cups, scattered about on the floor, a bucket, a board to wash on, and a
large stone pitcher, placed beneath the angle of the roof near the
broken door, which the wind kept continually blowing to and fro,
completed the whole of the family possessions.

This picture of squalid misery and desolation was lighted up by the
candle, whose flame, agitated by the cold northeasterly wind which found
its way through the tiles on the roof, sometimes imparted a pale,
unearthly light on the wretched scene, and then, playing on the heaps of
diamonds and rubies lying beside the sleeping artisan, caused a thousand
scintillating sparks to spring forth and dazzle the eye with their
prismatic rays of brightness.

Although the profoundest silence reigned around, seven out of the eight
unfortunate dwellers in this attic were awake; and each, from the
grandmother to the youngest child, watched the sleeping lapidary with
intense emotion, as their only hope, their only resource, and, in their
childlike selfishness, they murmured at seeing him thus inactive and
relinquishing that labour which they well knew was all they had to
depend on; but with different feelings of regret and uneasiness did the
lookers-on observe the slumber of the toil-worn man. The mother trembled
for her children's meal; the children thought but of themselves; while
the idiot neither thought of nor cared for any one. All at once she sat
upright in her wretched bed, crossed her long, bony arms, yellow and
dry as box-wood, on her shrivelled bosom, and kept watching the candle
with twinkling eyes; then, rising slowly and stealthily, she crept
along, trailing after her her old ragged coverlet, which clung around
her as though it had been her winding-sheet. She was above the middle
height, and her hair being so closely shaven made her head appear
disproportionately small; a sort of spasmodic movement kept up a
constant trembling in her thick, pendulous under-lip, while her whole
countenance offered the hideous model of ferocious stupidity. Slowly and
cautiously the idiot approached the lapidary's work-table, like a child
about to commit some forbidden act. When she reached the candle, she
held her two trembling hands over the flame; and such was their
skeleton-like condition, that the flickering light shone through them,
imparting a pale, livid hue to her features. From her pallet Madeleine
Morel watched every movement of the old woman, who, still warming
herself over the candle, stooped her head, and with a silly kind of
delight watched the sparkling of the diamonds and rubies, which lay
glittering on the table. Wholly absorbed in the wondrous contemplation
of such bright and beautiful things, the idiot allowed her hands to fall
into the flame of the candle, nor did she seem to recollect where they
were till the sense of burning recalled her attention, when she
manifested her pain and anger by a harsh, screaming cry.

At this sound Morel started, and quickly raised his head. He was about
forty years of age, with an open, intelligent, and mild expression of
countenance, but yet wearing the sad, dejected look of one who had been
the sport of misery and misfortune till they had planted furrows in his
cheeks and crushed and broken his spirit. A gray beard of many weeks'
growth covered the lower part of his face, which was deeply marked by
the smallpox; premature wrinkles furrowed his already bald forehead;
while his red and inflamed eyelids showed the overtaxed and sleepless
days and nights of toil he so courageously endured. A circumstance, but
too common with such of the working class as are doomed by their
occupation to remain nearly all day in one position, had warped his
figure, and, acting upon a naturally feeble constitution, had produced a
contraction of his whole frame. Continually obliged to stoop over his
work-table and to lean to the left, in order to keep his grindstone
going, the lapidary, in a manner petrified, ossified in the attitude he
was frequently obliged to preserve from twelve to fifteen hours a day,
had acquired an habitual stoop of the shoulders, and was completely
drawn on one side. So his left arm, incessantly exercised by the
difficult management of the grindstone, had acquired a considerable
muscular development; whilst the right arm, always inert and leaning on
the table, the better to present the faces of the diamonds to the action
of the grindstone, had wasted to the most extreme attenuation; his
wasted limbs, almost paralysed by complete want of exercise, could
scarcely support the weary, worn-out body, as though all strength,
substance, and vitality had concentrated themselves in the only part
called into play when toiling for the subsistence of, with himself,
eight human creatures.

And often would poor Morel touchingly observe: "It is not for myself
that I care to eat, but to give strength to the arm which turns the
mill."

Awaking with a sudden start, the lapidary found himself directly
opposite to the poor idiot.

"What ails you? what is the matter, mother?" said Morel; and then added,
in a lower tone, for fear of awaking the family, whom he hoped and
believed were asleep, "Go back to bed, mother; Madeleine and the
children are asleep!"

"No, father," cried the eldest of the little girls, "I am awake; I am
trying to warm poor little Adèle."

"And I am too hungry to go to sleep," added one of the boys; "it was not
my turn to-night to have supper with Mlle. Rigolette."

"Poor things!" said Morel, sorrowfully; "I thought you were asleep--at
least--"

"I was afraid of awaking you, Morel," said the wife, "or I should have
begged of you to give me a drink of water; I am devoured with thirst! My
feverish fit has come on again!"

"I will directly," said the lapidary; "only let me first get mother back
to bed. Come! come! what are you meddling with those stones for? Let
them alone, I say!" cried he to the old woman, whose whole attention
seemed riveted upon a splendid ruby, the bright scintillations of which
had so charmed the poor idiot that she was trying by every possible
means to gain possession of it.

"There's a pretty thing! there, there!" replied the woman, pointing with
vehement gestures to the prize she so ardently coveted.

"I shall be angry in a few minutes," exclaimed Morel, speaking in a loud
voice to terrify his mother-in-law into submission, and gently pushing
back the hand she advanced to seize her desired treasure.

"Oh, Morel! Morel!" murmured Madeleine, "I am parching, dying with
thirst. How can you be so cruel as to refuse me a little water?"

"But how can I at present? I must not allow mother to meddle with these
stones,--perhaps to lose me a diamond, as she did a year ago; and God
alone knows the wretchedness and misery it cost us,--ay, may still
occasion us. Ah, that unfortunate loss of the diamond, what have we not
suffered by it!"

As the poor lapidary uttered these words, he passed his hand over his
aching brow with a desponding air, and said to one of the children:

"Felix, give your mother something to drink. You are awake, and can
attend to her."

"No, no," exclaimed Madeleine; "he will take cold. I will wait."

"Oh, mother," said the boy, rising, "never mind me. I shall be quite as
warm up as I am in this _paillasse_."

"Come, will you let the things alone?" cried Morel, in a threatening
tone, to the idiot woman, who kept bending over the precious stones and
trying to seize them, spite of all his efforts to move her from the
table.

"Mother," called out Felix, "what shall I do? The water in the pitcher
is frozen quite hard."

"Then break the ice," murmured Madeleine.

"It is so thick, I can't," answered the boy.

"Morel!" exclaimed Madeleine, in a querulous and impatient tone, "since
there is nothing but water for me to drink, let me at least have a
draught of that! You are letting me die with thirst!"

"God of heaven grant me patience!" cried the unfortunate man. "How can I
leave your mother to lose and destroy these stones? Pray let me manage
her first."

But the lapidary found it no easy matter to get rid of the idiot, who,
beginning to feel irritated at the constant opposition she met with,
gave utterance to her displeasure in a sort of hideous growl.

"Call her, wife!" said Morel. "She will attend to you sometimes."

"Mother! mother!" called Madeleine, "go to bed, and be good, and then
you shall have some of that nice coffee you are so fond of!"

"I want that! and that! There! there!" replied the idiot, making a
desperate effort this time to possess herself of a heap of rubies she
particularly coveted. Morel firmly, but gently, repulsed her,--all in
vain; with pertinacious obstinacy the old woman kept struggling to break
from his grasp, and snatch the bright gems, on which she kept her eyes
fixed with eager fondness.

"You will never manage her," said Madeleine, "unless you frighten her
with the whip; there is no other means of making her quiet."

"I am afraid not," returned Morel; "but, though she has no sense, it yet
goes to my heart to be obliged to threaten an old woman, like her, with
the whip."

Then, addressing the old woman, who was trying to bite him, and whom he
was holding back with one hand, he said, in a loud and terrible voice:
"Take care; you'll have the whip on your shoulders if you don't make
haste to bed this very instant!"

These menaces were equally vain with his former efforts to subdue her.
Morel then took a whip which lay beside his work-table, and, cracking it
violently, said: "Get to bed with you directly! Get to bed!"

As the loud noise of the whip saluted the ear of the idiot, she hurried
away from the lapidary's work-table, then, suddenly turning around, she
uttered low, grumbling sounds between her clenched teeth; while she
surveyed her son-in-law with looks of the deepest hatred.

"To bed! to bed, I say!" continued he, still advancing, and feigning to
raise his whip with the intention of striking; while the idiot, holding
her fist towards her son-in-law, retreated backwards to her wretched
couch.

The lapidary, anxious to terminate this painful scene, that he might be
at liberty to attend to his sick wife, kept still advancing towards the
idiot woman, brandishing and cracking his whip, though without allowing
it to touch the unhappy creature, repeatedly exclaiming, "To bed! to
bed,--directly! Do you hear?"

The old woman, now thoroughly conquered, and fully believing in the
reality of the threats held out, began to howl most hideously; and
crawling into her bed, like a dog to his kennel, she kept up a continued
series of cries, screams, and yells, while the frightened children,
believing their poor old grandmother had actually been beaten, began
crying piteously, exclaiming, "Don't beat poor granny, father! Pray
don't flog granny!"

It is wholly impossible to describe the fearful effect of these
nocturnal horrors, in which were mingled, in one turmoil of sounds, the
supplicating cries of the children, the furious yellings of the idiot,
and the wailing complaints of the lapidary's sick wife.

To poor Morel such scenes as this were but too frequent. Still, upon the
present occasion, his patience and courage seemed utterly to forsake
him; and, throwing down the whip upon his work-table, he exclaimed, in
bitter despair, "Oh, what a life! what a life!"

"Is it my fault if my mother is an idiot?" asked Madeleine, weeping.

"Is it mine, then?" replied Morel. "All I ask for is peace and quiet
enough to allow me to work myself to death for you all. God knows I
labour alike night and day! Yet I complain not. And, as long as my
strength holds out, I will exert myself to the utmost; but it is quite
impossible for me to attend to my business, and be at once a keeper to a
mad woman and a nurse to sick people and young children. And Heaven is
unjust to put it upon me,--yes, I say unjust! It is too much misery to
heap on one man," added Morel, in a tone bordering on distraction. So
saying, the heart-broken lapidary threw himself on his stool, and
covered his face with his hands.

"Can I help the people at the hospital having refused to receive my
mother, because she was not raving mad?" asked Madeleine, in a low,
peevish, and complaining voice. "What can I do to alter it? What is the
use of your grumbling to me about my mother? and, if you fret ever so
much about what neither you nor I can alter, what good will that do?"

"None at all," rejoined the artisan, hastily brushing the large bitter
drops despair had driven to his eyes; "none whatever,--you are right;
but when everything goes against you, it is difficult to know what to
do or say."

"Gracious Father!" cried Madeleine; "what an agony of thirst I am
enduring! My lips are parched with the fever which is consuming me, and
yet I shiver as though death were on me!"

"Wait one instant, and I will give you some drink!" So saying, Morel
took the pitcher which stood beneath the roof, and, after having with
difficulty broken the ice which covered the water, he filled a cup with
the frozen liquid, and brought it to the bedside of his wife, who
stretched forth her impatient hands to receive it; but, after a moment's
reflection, he said, "No, no, I must not let you have it cold as this;
in your present state of fever it would be dangerous."

"So much the better if it be dangerous! Quick, quick--give it me!" cried
Madeleine, with bitterness; "it will the sooner end my misery, and free
you from such an incumbrance as I am; then you will only have to look
after mad folks and young children,--there will be no sick-nurse to take
up your time."

"Why do you say such hard words to me, Madeleine?" asked Morel,
mournfully; "you know I do not deserve them. Pray do not add to my
vexations, for I have scarcely strength or reason enough left to go on
with my work; my head feels as though something were amiss with it, and
I fear much my brain will give way,--and then what would become of you
all? 'Tis for you I speak; were there only myself, I should trouble very
little about to-morrow,--thank Heaven, the river flows for every one!"

"Poor Morel!" said Madeleine, deeply affected. "I was very wrong to
speak so angrily to you, and to say I knew you would be glad to get rid
of me. Pray forgive me, for indeed I did not mean any harm; for, after
all, what use am I either to you or the children? For the last sixteen
months I have kept my bed! Gracious God! what I do suffer with thirst!
For pity's sake, husband, give me something to moisten my burning lips!"

"You shall have it directly; I was trying to warm the cup between my
hands."

"How good you are! and yet I could say such wicked things to you!"

"My poor wife, you are ill and in pain, and that makes you impatient;
say anything you like to me, but pray never tell me again I wish to get
rid of you!"

"But what good am I to any one? what good are our children? None
whatever; on the contrary, they heap more toil upon you than you can
bear."

"True; yet you see that my love for them and you has endued me with
strength and resolution to work frequently twenty hours out of the
twenty-four, till my body is bent and deformed by such incessant labour.
Do you believe for one instant that I would thus toil and struggle on my
own account? Oh, no! life has no such charms for me; and if I were the
only sufferer, I would quickly put an end to it."

"And so would I," said Madeleine. "God knows, but for the children I
should have said to you, long ago, 'Morel, we have had more than enough
to weary us of our lives; there is nothing left but to finish our misery
by the help of a pan of charcoal!' But then I recollected the poor,
dear, helpless children, and my heart would not let me leave them, alone
and unprotected, to starve by themselves."

"Well, then, you see, wife, that the children are, after all, of real
good to us, since they prevent us giving way to despair, and serve as a
motive for exerting ourselves," replied Morel, with ready ingenuity, yet
perfect simplicity of tone and manner. "Now, then, take your drink, but
only swallow a little at a time, for it is very cold still."

"Oh, thank you, Morel!" cried Madeleine, snatching the cup, and drinking
it eagerly.

"Enough! enough! no more! you shall not have any more just now,
Madeleine."

"Gracious Heaven!" exclaimed Madeleine, giving back the cup, "how cold
it seems now I have swallowed it,--it has brought back those dreadful
shiverings!"

"Alas!" ejaculated Morel, "I told you so,--ah, now you are quite ill
again!"

"I have not strength even to tremble,--I seem as though I were covered
over with ice."

Morel took off his jacket, and laid it over his wife's feet, remaining
quite naked down to his waist,--the unhappy man did not possess a shirt.

"But you will be frozen to death, Morel!"

"Never mind me; if I find it cold by and by, I will put my jacket on for
a few minutes."

"Poor fellow!" sighed Madeleine. "Ah, as you say, Heaven is not just!
What have we done to be so wretched, while so many others--"

"Every one has their troubles,--some more, some less,--the great as well
as the small."

"Yes; but great people know nothing of the gnawings of hunger, or the
bitter pinching of the cold. Why, when I look on those diamonds, and
remember that the smallest amongst them would place us and the poor
children in ease and comfort, my heart sickens, and I ask myself why it
is some should have so much, and others nothing? And what good are these
diamonds, after all, to their owners?"

"Why, if we were to go to the question of what half the luxuries of life
are really good for, we might go a great way; for instance, what is the
good of that grand gentleman Madame Pipelet calls the commandant having
engaged and furnished the first floor of this house, when he seldom
enters it? What use is it his having there good beds, and warm covering
to them, since he never sleeps in them?"

"Very true; there is more furniture lying idle there than would supply
two or three poor families like ours. And then Madame Pipelet lights a
fire every day, to preserve the things from the damp. Only think of so
much comfortable warmth being lost, while we and the children are almost
frozen to death! But then, you will say, we are not articles of value;
no, indeed, we are not. Oh, these rich folks, what hard hearts they
have!"

"Not harder than other people's, Madeleine; but then, you see, they do
not know what misery or want are. They are born rich and happy, they
live and die so. How, then, do you expect they can ever think such poor
distressed beings exist in a world which to them is all happiness? No! I
tell you, they have no idea of such things as fellow creatures toiling
beyond their strength for food, and perishing at last with hunger! How
is it possible for them to imagine privations like ours? The greater
their hunger, the greater enjoyment of their abundant meal. Is the
weather severe, or the cold intense, they call it a fine frost, a
healthful, bracing season. If they walk out, they return to a glowing,
cheerful fire, which the cold only makes them relish the more; so that
they can scarcely be expected to sympathise with such as are said to
suffer from cold and hunger, when those two things rather add to than
diminish their pleasure."

"Ah, poor folks are better than rich, since they can feel for each
other, and are always ready and willing to assist each other as much as
lies in their power. Look at that kind, good Mlle. Rigolette, who has so
often sat up all night, either with me or the children, during our
illness. Why, last night she took Jérome and Pierre into her room, to
share her supper, and it was not much, either, she had for
herself,--only a cup of milk and some bread; at her age, all young
people have good appetites, and she must have deprived herself to give
to the children."

"Poor girl! she is indeed most kind,--and why is she so? Because she
knows what poverty is. As I said to you just now, if the rich only
knew--"

"And then that nice-looking lady who came, seeming so frightened all the
while, to ask us if we wanted anything. Well, now she knows that we do
want everything, will she ever come again, think you?"

"I dare say she will; for, spite of her uneasy and terrified looks, she
seemed very good and kind."

"Oh, yes; if a person be but rich, they are always right in your
opinion. One might almost suppose that rich folks are made of different
materials to poor creatures like us."

"Stop, wife!" said Morel, gently; "you are getting on too fast. I did
not say that; on the contrary, I agree that rich people have as many
faults as poor ones; all I mean is, that, unfortunately, they are not
aware of the wretchedness of one-half of the world. Agents in plenty are
employed to hunt out poor wretches who have committed any crime, but
there are no paid agents to find out half-starving families and honest
artisans, worn-out with toil and privations, who, driven to the last
extremity of distress, are, for want of a little timely succour, led
into sore temptation. It is quite right to punish evil-doers; it would,
perhaps, be better still to prevent ill deeds. A man may have striven
hard to remain honest for fifty years; but want, misery, and utter
destitution put bad thoughts in his head, and one rascal more is let
loose on the world; whilst there are many who, if they had but known of
his distressed condition--However, it is no use talking of that,--the
world is as it is: I am poor and wretched, and therefore I speak as I
do; were I rich, my talk would be of fêtes, and happy days, and worldly
engagements--And how do you find yourself now, wife?"

"Much the same; I seem to have lost all feeling in my limbs. But how you
shiver! Here, take your jacket, and pray put it on. Blow out that
candle, which is burning uselessly,--see, it is nearly day!"

And, true enough, a faint, glimmering light began to struggle through
the snow with which the skylight was encumbered, and cast a dismal ray
on the interior of this deplorable human abode, rendering its
squalidness still more apparent; the shade of night had at least
concealed a part of its horrors.

"I shall wait now for the daylight before I go back to work," said the
lapidary, seating himself beside his wife's _paillasse_, and leaning his
forehead upon his two hands.

After a short interval of silence, Madeleine said:

"When is Madame Mathieu to come for the stones you are at work upon?"

"This morning. I have only the side of one false diamond to polish."

"A false diamond! How is that?--you who only make up real stones,
whatever the people in the house may believe."

"Don't you know? But I forgot, you were asleep the other day when Madame
Mathieu came about them. Well, then, she brought me ten false
diamonds--Rhine crystals--to cut exactly to the same size and form as
the like number of real diamonds she also brought. There, those are them
mixed with the rubies on my table. I think I never saw more splendid
stones, or of purer water, than those ten diamonds, which must, at
least, be worth 60,000 francs."

"And why did she wish them imitated?"

"Because a great lady to whom they belonged--a duchess, I think she
said--had given directions to M. Baudoin, the jeweller, to dispose of
her set of diamonds, and to make her one of false stones to replace it.
Madame Mathieu, who matches stones for M. Baudoin, explained this to me,
when she gave me the real diamonds, in order that I might be quite sure
to cut the false ones to precisely the same size and form. Madame
Mathieu gave a similar job to four other lapidaries, for there are from
forty to fifty stones to cut; and I could not do them all, as they were
required by this morning, because M. Baudoin must have time to set the
false gems. Madame Mathieu says that grand ladies, very frequently
unknown to anybody but the jeweller, sell their valuable diamonds, and
replace them with Rhenish crystals."

"Why, don't you see, the mock stones look every bit as well as the real
stones? Yet great ladies, who only use such things as ornaments, would
never think of sacrificing one of their diamonds to relieve the distress
of such unfortunate beings as we are."

"Come, come, wife! Be more reasonable than this; sorrow makes you
unjust. Who do you think knows that such people as Morel and his family
are in existence, still less that they are in want?"

"Oh, what a man you are, Morel! I really believe, if any one were to cut
you in pieces, that, while they were doing it, you would try to say,
'Thank you!'"

Morel compassionately shrugged his shoulders.

"And how much will Madame Mathieu owe you this morning?" asked
Madeleine.

"Nothing; because you know I have already had an advance of 120 francs."

"Nothing! Why, our last sou went the day before yesterday. We have not a
single farthing belonging to us!"

"Alas, no!" cried Morel, with a dejected air.

"Well, then, what are we to do?"

"I know not."

"The baker refuses to let us have anything more on credit,--will he?"

"No; and I was obliged yesterday to beg Madame Pipelet to lend me part
of a loaf."

"Can we borrow anything more of Mother Burette?"

"She has already every article belonging to us in pledge. What have we
to offer her to lend more money on,--our children?" asked Morel, with a
smile of bitterness.

"But yourself, my mother, and all the children had but part of a loaf
among you all yesterday. You cannot go on in this way; you will be
starved to death. It is all your fault that we are not on the books of
the charitable institution this year."

"They will not admit any persons without they possess furniture, or some
such property; and you know we have nothing in the world. We are looked
upon as though we lived in furnished apartments, and, consequently,
ineligible. Just the same if we tried to get into any asylum, the
children are required to have at least a blouse, while our poor things
have only rags. Then, as to the charitable societies, one must go
backwards and forwards twenty times before we should obtain relief; and
then what would it be? Why, a loaf once a month, and half a pound of
meat once a fortnight.[5] I should lose more time than it would be
worth."

  [5] Such is the ordinary allowance made at charitable
  societies, in consequence of the vast number of applicants for
  relief.

"But, still, what are we to do?"

"Perhaps the lady who came yesterday will not forget us!"

"Perhaps not. But don't you think Madame Mathieu would lend us four or
five francs, just to keep us from starving? You have worked for her
upwards of ten years; and surely she will not see an honest workman like
you, burthened with a large and sickly family, perish for want of a
little assistance like that?"

"I do not think it is in her power to aid us. She did all in her power
when she advanced me little by little 120 francs. That is a large sum
for her. Because she buys diamonds, and has sometimes 50,000 francs in
her reticule, she is not the more rich for that. If she gains 100
francs a month, she is well content, for she has heavy expenses,--two
nieces to bring up; and five francs is as much to her as it would be to
me. There are times when one does not possess that sum, you know; and
being already so deeply in her debt, I could not ask her to take bread
from her own mouth and that of her family to give it to me."

"This comes of working for mere agents in jewelry, instead of procuring
employment from first-hand master jewellers. They are sometimes less
particular. But you are such a poor, easy creature, you would almost let
any one take the eyes out of your head. It is all your fault that--"

"My fault!" exclaimed the unhappy man, exasperated by this absurd
reproach. "Was it or was it not your mother who occasioned all our
misfortunes, by compelling me to make good the price of the diamond she
lost? But for that we should be beforehand with the world; we should
receive the amount of my daily earnings; we should have the 1,100 francs
in our possession we were obliged to draw out of the savings-bank to put
to the 1,300 francs lent us by M. Jacques Ferrand. May every curse light
on him!"

"And you still persist in not asking him to help you? Certainly he is so
stingy that I daresay he would do nothing for you; but then it is right
to try. You cannot know without you do try."

"Ask him to help me!" cried Morel. "Ask him! I had rather be burnt
before a slow fire. Hark ye, Madeleine! Unless you wish to drive me mad,
mention that man's name no more to me."

As he uttered these words, the usually mild, resigned expression of the
lapidary's countenance was exchanged for a look of gloomy energy, while
a slight suffusion coloured the ordinarily pale features of the agitated
man, as, rising abruptly from the pallet beside which he had been
sitting, he began to pace the miserable apartment with hurried steps;
and, spite of the deformed and attenuated appearance of poor Morel, his
attitude and action bespoke the noblest, purest indignation.

"I am not ill-disposed towards any man," cried he, at length, pausing of
a sudden; "and never, to my knowledge, harmed a human being. But, I tell
you, when I think of this notary, I wish him--ah! I wish him--as much
wretchedness as he has caused me." Then pressing both hands to his
forehead, he murmured, in a mournful tone: "Just God! what crime have I
committed that a hard fate should deliver me and mine, tied hand and
foot, into the power of such a hypocrite? Have his riches been given him
only to worry, harass, and destroy those his bad passions lead him to
persecute, injure, and corrupt?"

"That's right! that's right!" said Madeleine; "go on abusing him. You
will have done yourself a great deal of good, shall you not, when he
puts you in prison, as he can do any day, for that promissory note of
1,300 francs on which he obtained judgment against you? He holds you
fast as a bird at the end of a string. I hate this notary as badly as
you do; but since we are so completely in his power, why you should--"

"Let him ruin and dishonour my child, I suppose?" burst from the pale
lips of the lapidary, with violent and impatient energy.

"For heaven's sake, Morel, don't speak so loud; the children are awake,
and will hear you."

"Pooh, pooh!" returned Morel, with bitter irony; "it will serve as a
fine example for our two little girls. It will instruct them to expect
that, one of these days, some villain or other like the notary may take
a fancy to them,--perhaps the same man; and then, I suppose, you would
tell me, as now, to be careful how I offended him, since he had me in
his power. You say, if I displease him, he can put me in prison. Now,
tell the truth: you advise me, then, to leave my daughter at his mercy,
do you not?"

And then, passing from the extreme of rage at the idea of all the
wickedness practised by the notary to tender recollections of his child,
the unhappy man burst into a sort of convulsive weeping, mingled with
deep and heavy sobs, for his kindly nature could not long sustain the
tone of sarcastic indignation he had assumed.

"Oh, my children!" cried he, with bitter grief; "my poor children! My
good, my beautiful, too--too beautiful Louise! 'Tis from those rich
gifts of nature all our troubles proceeded. Had you been less lovely,
that man would never have pressed his money upon me. I am honest and
hard-working; and if the jeweller had given me time, I should never have
been under the obligation to the old monster, of which he avails himself
to seek to dishonour my child. I should not then have left her a single
hour within his power; but I dare not remove her,--I dare not! For am I
not at his mercy? Oh, want! oh, misery! What insults do they not make us
endure!"

"But what can you do?" asked Madeleine. "You know he threatens Louise
that if she quits him he will put you in prison directly."

"Oh, yes! He dares address her as though she were the very vilest of
creatures."

"Well, you must not mind that; for should she leave the notary, there is
no doubt he would instantly throw you into prison, and then what would
become of me, with these five helpless creatures and my mother? Suppose
Louise did earn twenty francs a month in another place, do you think
seven persons can live on that?"

"And so that we may live, Louise is to be disgraced and left to ruin?"

"You always make things out worse than they are. It is true the notary
makes offers of love to Louise; she has told us so repeatedly. But then
you know what a good girl she is; she would never listen to him."

"She is good, indeed; and so right-minded, active, and industrious!
When, seeing how badly we were off in consequence of your long illness,
she insisted upon going to service that she might not be a burthen to
us, did I not say what it cost me to part with her? To think of my sweet
Louise being subjected to all the harshness and humiliation of a
servant's life,--she who was naturally so proud that we used
jokingly--ah, we could joke then!--to call her the Princess, because she
always said that, by dint of care and cleanliness, she would make our
little home like a palace! Dear Louise! It would have been my greatest
happiness to have kept her with me, though I had worked all day and all
night too. And when I saw her blooming face, with her bright eyes
glancing at me as she sat beside my work-table, my labour always seemed
lightened; and when she sung like a bird those little songs she knew I
liked to hear, I used to fancy myself the happiest father alive. Poor
dear Louise! so hard-working, yet always so gay and lively! Why, she
could even manage your mother, and make her do whatever she wished. But
I defy any one to resist her sweet words or winning smile. And how she
watched over and waited upon you! What pains she would take to try and
divert you from thinking of what you suffered! And how tenderly she
looked after her little brothers and sisters, finding time for
everything! Ah, with our Louise all our joy and happiness--all--all--left
us!"

"Don't go on so, Morel. Don't remind me of all these things, or you will
break my heart," cried Madeleine, weeping bitterly.

"And, then, when I think that perhaps that old monster--Do you know,
when that idea flashes across my brain, my senses seem disturbed, and I
have but one thought, that of first killing him and then killing
myself?"

"What would become of all of us if you were to do so? Besides, I tell
you again, you make things worse than they really are. I dare say the
notary was only joking with Louise. He is such a pious man, and goes so
regularly to mass every Sunday, and only keeps company with priests
folks say. Why, many people think that he is safer to place money with
than the bank itself."

"Well, and what does all that prove? Merely that he is a rich hypocrite,
instead of a poor one. I know well enough what a good girl Louise is;
but then she loves us so tenderly that it breaks her heart to see the
want and wretchedness we are in. She knows well enough that if anything
were to happen to me you would all perish with hunger; and by
threatening to put me into prison he might work on the dear child's
mind,--like a villain as he is,--and persuade her, on our account! O,
God, my brain burns! I feel as though I were going mad."

"But, Morel, if ever that were the case, the notary would be sure to
make her a great number of fine presents or money, and, I am sure, she
would not have kept them all to herself. She would certainly have
brought part to us."

"Silence, woman! Let me hear no more such words escape your lips. Louise
touch the wages of infamy! My good, my virtuous girl, accept such foul
gifts! Oh, wife!"

"Not for herself, certainly. But to bring to us perhaps she would--"

"Madeleine," exclaimed Morel, excited almost to frenzy, "again, I say,
let me not hear such language from your lips; you make me shudder.
Heaven only knows what you and the children also would become were I
taken away, if such are your principles."

"Why, what harm did I say?"

"Oh, none."

"Then what makes you uneasy about Louise?"

The lapidary impatiently interrupted his wife by saying:

"Because I have noticed for the last three months that, whenever Louise
comes to see us, she seems embarrassed, and even confused. When I take
her in my arms and embrace her, as I have been used to do from her
birth, she blushes."

"Ah, that is with delight at seeing you, or from shame."

"She seems sadder and more dejected, too, each visit she pays us."

"Because she finds our misery constantly increasing. Besides, when I
spoke to her concerning the notary, she told me he had quite ceased his
threats of putting you in prison."

"But did she tell you the price she has paid to induce him to lay aside
his threats? She did not tell you that, I dare say, did she? Ah, a
father's eye is not to be deceived; and her blushes and embarrassments,
when giving me her usual kiss, make me dread I know not what. Why, would
it not be an atrocious thing to say to a poor girl, whose bread depended
on her employer's word, 'Either sacrifice your virtuous principles, and
become what I would have you, or quit my house? And if any one should
inquire of me respecting the character you have with me, I shall speak
of you in such terms that no one will take you into their service.'
Well, then, how much worse is it to frighten a fond and affectionate
child into surrendering her innocence, by threatening to put her father
into prison if she refused, when the brute knows that upon the labour of
that father a whole family depends? Surely the earth contains nothing
more infamous, more fiendlike, than such conduct."

"Ah," replied Madeleine, "and then only to think that with the value of
one, only one of those diamonds now lying on your table, we might pay
the notary all we owe him, and so take Louise out of his power and keep
her at home with us. Don't you see, husband?"

"What is the use of your repeating the same thing over and over again?
You might just as well tell me that if I were rich I should not be
poor," answered Morel, with sorrowful impatience. For such was the
innate and almost constitutional honesty of this man, that it never once
occurred to him that his weak-minded partner, bowed down and irritated
by long suffering and want, could ever have conceived the idea of
tempting him to a dishonourable appropriation of that which belonged to
another.

With a heavy sigh, the unfortunate man resigned himself to his hard
fate. "Thrice happy those parents who can retain their innocent children
beneath the paternal roof, and defend them from the thousand snares laid
to entrap their unsuspecting youth. But who is there to watch over the
safety of the poor girl condemned at an early age to seek employment
from home? Alas, no one! Directly she is capable of adding her mite to
the family earnings, she leaves her dwelling at an early hour, and
repairs to the manufactory where she may happen to be engaged.
Meanwhile, both father and mother are too busily employed to have
leisure to attend to their daughter's comings or goings. 'Our time is
our stock in trade,' cry they, 'and bread is too dear to enable us to
lay aside our work while we look after our children.' And then there is
an outcry raised as to the quantity of depraved females constantly to be
met with, and of the impropriety of conduct among those of the lower
orders, wholly forgetting that the parents have neither the means of
keeping them at home, nor of watching over their morals when away from
them."

Thus mentally moralised Morel. Then, speaking aloud, he added:

"After all, our greatest privation is when forced to quit our parents,
wives, or children. It is to the poor that family affection is most
comforting and beneficial. Yet, directly our children grow up, and are
capable of becoming our dearest companions, we are forced to part with
them."

At this moment some one knocked loudly at the door.




CHAPTER XIII.

JUDGMENT AND EXECUTION.


The lapidary, much astonished, rose and opened the door. Two men entered
the garret. One, tall, lanky, with an ill-favoured and pimply face,
shaded by thick grizzly whiskers, held in his hand a thick cane, loaded
at the head; he wore a battered hat, and a long-tailed and bespattered
green coat, buttoned up close to his throat. Above the threadbare velvet
collar was displayed his long neck, red and bald like that of a vulture.
This man's name was Malicorne. The other was a shorter man, with a look
as low-lived, and red, fat, puffed features, dressed with a great effort
at ridiculous splendour. Shiny buttons were in the folds of the front of
his shirt, whose cleanliness was most suspicious, and a long chain of
mosaic gold serpentined down a faded plaid waistcoat, which was seen
beneath his seedy Chesterfield, of a yellowish gray colour. This
gentleman's name was Bourdin.

"How poverty-stricken this hole smells," said Malicorne, pausing on the
threshold.

"Why, it does not scent of lavender-water. Confound it, but we have a
lowish customer to deal with," responded Bourdin, with a gesture of
disgust and contempt, and then advanced towards the artisan, who was
looking at him with as much surprise as indignation.

Through the door, left a little ajar, might be seen the villainous,
watchful, and cunning face of the young scamp Tortillard, who, having
followed these strangers unknown to them, was sneaking after, spying,
and listening to them.

"What do you want?" inquired the lapidary, abruptly, disgusted at the
coarseness of these fellows.

"Jérome Morel?" said Bourdin.

"I am he!"

"Working lapidary?"

"Yes."

"You are quite sure?"

"Quite sure. But you are troublesome, so tell me at once your business,
or leave the room."

"Really, your politeness is remarkable! Much obliged! I say, Malicorne,"
said the man, turning to his comrade, "there's not so much fat to cut at
here as there was at that 'ere Viscount de Saint-Rémy's."

"I believe you; but when there is fat, why the door's kept shut in your
face, as we found in the Rue de Chaillot. The bird had hopped the twig,
and precious quick, too, whilst such vermin as these hold on to their
cribs like a snail to his shell."

"I believe you; well, the stone jug just suits such individuals."

"The sufferer (creditor) must be a good fellow, for it will cost him
more than it's worth; but that's his lookout."

"If," said Morel, angrily, "you were not drunk, as you seem to be, I
should be angry with you. Leave this apartment instantly!"

"Ha! ha! He's a fine fellow with his elegant curve," said Bourdin,
making an insulting allusion to the contorted figure of the poor
lapidary. "I say, Malicorne, he has cheek enough to call this an
apartment,--a hole in which I would not put my dog."

"Oh, dear! oh, dear!" exclaimed Madeleine, who had been so frightened
that she could not say a word before. "Call for assistance; perhaps they
are rogues. Take care of your diamonds!"

And, seeing these two ill-looking strangers come closer to his
working-bench, on which his precious stones were still lying, Morel,
fearful of some evil intentions, ran towards the table, and covered the
jewels with his two hands.

Tortillard, still on the watch, caught at Madeleine's words, observed
the movement of the artisan, and said to himself:

"Ha! ha! ha! So they said he was a lapidary of sham stones; if they were
mock he would not be afraid of being robbed; this is a good thing to
know. So Mother Mathieu, who comes here so often, is a matcher of _real_
stones, after all, and has real diamonds in her basket; this is a good
thing to know, and I'll tell the Chouette," added Bras Rouge's brat.

"If you do not leave this room, I will call in the guard," said Morel.

The children, alarmed at this scene, began to cry, and the idiotic
mother sat up in her bed.

"If any one has a right to call for the guard, it is we, you Mister
Twistabout," said Bourdin.

"And the guard would lend us a hand to carry you off to gaol if you
resist," added Malicorne. "We have not the magistrate with us, it is
true; but if you have any wish for his company, we'll find you one, just
out of bed, hot and heavy; Bourdin will go and fetch him."

"To prison! me?" exclaimed Morel, struck with dismay.

"Yes, to Clichy."

"To Clichy?" repeated the artisan, with an air of despair.

"It seems a hardish pill," said Malicorne.

"Well, then, to the debtors' jail, if you like that better," said
Bourdin.

"You--what--indeed--why--the notary--ah, _mon Dieu_!"

And the workman, pale as death, fell on his stool, unable to add another
word.

"We are bound bailiffs, come to lay hold of you; now are you fly?"

"Morel, it is the note of Louise's master! We are undone!" exclaimed
Madeleine, in a tone of agony.

"Hear the judgment," said Malicorne, taking from his dirty and crammed
pocketbook a stamped writ.

After having skimmed over, according to custom, a part of this document
in an unintelligible tone, he distinctly articulated the last words,
which were, unfortunately, but too important to the artisan:

    "Judgment finally given. The Tribunal condemns Jérome Morel to
    pay to Pierre Petit-Jean, merchant,[6] by every available means,
    even to the arrest of body, the sum of 1,300 francs, with
    interest from the day of protest, and to pay all other and extra
    costs. Given and judged at Paris, 13 September, etc., etc."

  [6] The cunning notary, unable to prosecute in his own name,
  had made the unfortunate Morel give a blank acceptance, and
  had filled up the note of hand with the name of a third party.

"And Louise! Louise!" cried Morel, almost distracted in his brain, and
apparently unheeding the long preamble which had just been read. "Where
is Louise, then, for, doubtless, she has quitted the notary, since he
sends me to prison? My child! My Louise! What has become of you?"

"Who the devil is Louise?" asked Bourdin.

"Let him alone!" replied Malicorne, brutally; "don't you see the
respectable old twaddler is not right in his nonsense-box?" Then,
approaching Morel, he added: "I say, my fine fellow, right about file!
March on! Let us get out of here, will you, and have a little fresh air.
You stink enough to poison a cat in this here hole!"

"Morel!" shrieked Madeleine, wildly, "don't go! Kill those wretches! Oh,
you coward, not to knock them down! What! are you going to let them
take you away? Are you going to abandon us all?"

"Pray don't put yourself out of the way, ma'am," said Bourdin, with an
ironical grin. "I've only just got to remark that if your good man lays
his little finger on me, why I'll make him remember it," continued he,
swinging his loaded stick round and round.

Entirely occupied with thoughts of Louise, Morel scarcely heard a word
of what was passing. All at once an expression of bitter satisfaction
passed over his countenance, as he said:

"Louise has doubtless left the notary's house; now I shall go to prison
willingly." Then, casting a troubled look around him, he exclaimed: "But
my wife! Her mother! The children! Who will provide for them? No one
will trust me with stones to work at in prison, for it will be supposed
my bad conduct has sent me there. Does this hard-hearted notary wish the
destruction of myself and all my family also?"

"Once, twice, old chap," said Bourdin, "will you stop your gammon? You
are enough to bore a man to death. Come, put on your things, and let us
be off."

"Good gentlemen, kind gentlemen," cried Madeleine, from her sick-bed,
"pray forgive what I said just now! Surely you will not be so cruel as
to take my husband away; what will become of me and my five poor
children, and my old mother, who is an idiot? There she lies; you see
her, poor old creature, huddled up on her mattress; she is quite out of
her senses, my good gentlemen; she is, indeed, quite mad!"

"La! what, that old bald-headed thing a woman? Well, hang me if that
ain't enough to astonish a man!"

"I'll be hanged if it isn't, then!" cried the other bailiff, bursting
into a horse-laugh; "why, I took it for something tied up in an old
sack. Look! her old head is shaved quite close; it seems as though she
had got a white skull-cap on."

"Go, children, and kneel down, and beg of these good gentlemen not to
take away your poor father, our only support," said Madeleine, anxious
by a last effort to touch the hearts of the bailiffs. But, spite of
their mother's orders, the terrified children remained weeping on their
miserable mattress.

At the unusual noise which prevailed, added to the aspect of two strange
men in the room, the poor idiot turned herself towards the wall, as
though striving to hide from them, uttering all the time the most
discordant cries and moans. Morel, meanwhile, appeared unconscious of
all that was going on; this last stroke of fate had been so frightful
and unexpected, and the consequences of his arrest were so dreadful,
that his mind seemed almost unequal to understanding its reality. Worn
out by all manner of privations, and exhausted by over-toil, his
strength utterly forsook him, and he remained seated on his stool, pale
and haggard, and as though incapable of speech or motion, his head
drooping on his breast, and his arms hanging listlessly by his side.

"Deuce take me," cried Malicorne, "if that old patterer is not going
fast asleep! Why, I say, my chap, you seem to think nothing of keeping
gen'l'men like us waiting; just remember, will you, our time is
precious! You know this is not exactly a party of pleasure, so march, or
I shall be obliged to make you."

Suiting the action to the word, the man grasped the artisan by the
shoulder, and shook him roughly; which so alarmed the children, that,
unable to restrain their terror, the three little boys emerged from
their _paillasse_, and, half naked as they were, came in an agony of
tears to throw themselves at the feet of the bailiffs, holding up their
clasped hands, and crying, in tones of touching earnestness:

"Pray, pray don't hurt our dear father!"

At the sight of these poor, shivering, half-clad infants, weeping with
affright, and trembling with cold, Bourdin, spite of his natural
callousness and long acquaintance with scenes of this sort, could not
avoid a feeling almost resembling compassion from stealing over him,
while his pitiless companion, brutally disengaging himself from the
grasp of the small, weak creatures who were clinging to him, exclaimed:

"Hands off, you young ragamuffins! A devilish fine trade ours would be,
if we were to allow ourselves to be mauled about by a set of beggars'
brats like you!"

As though the scene were not sufficiently distressing, a fearful
addition was made to its horrors. The eldest of the little girls, who
had remained in the _paillasse_ with her sick sister, suddenly
exclaimed:

"Mother! mother! I don't know what's the matter with Adèle! She is so
cold, and her eyes are fixed on my face, and yet she does not breathe."

The poor little child, whose consumptive appearance we have before
noticed, had expired gently, and without a sigh, her looks fixed
earnestly on the sister she so tenderly loved.

No language can describe the cry which burst from the lips of the
lapidary's wife at these words, which at once revealed the dreadful
truth; it was one of those wild, despairing, convulsive shrieks, which
seem to sever the very heart-strings of a mother.

"My poor little sister looks as though she were dead!" continued the
child; "she frightens me, with her eyes fixed on me, and her face so
cold!"

Saying which, in an agony of terror, she leaped from beside the corpse
of the infant, and ran to shelter herself in her mother's arms, while
the distracted parent, forgetting that her almost paralysed limbs were
incapable of supporting her, made a violent effort to rise and go to the
assistance of her child, whom she could not believe was actually past
recovery; but her strength failed her, and with a deep sigh of despair
she sunk upon the floor. That cry found an echo in the heart of Morel,
and roused him from his stupor. He sprang with one bound to the
_paillasse_, and withdrew from it the stiffened form of an infant four
years old, dead and cold. Want and misery had accelerated its end,
although its complaint, which had originated in the positive want of
common necessaries, was beyond the reach of any human aid to remove. Its
poor little limbs were already rigid with death. Morel, whose very hair
seemed to stand on end with despair and terror, stood holding his dead
child in his arms, motionlessly contemplating its thin features with a
fixed bloodshot gaze, though no tear moistened his dry, burning
eyeballs.

"Morel! Morel, give Adèle to me!" cried the unhappy mother, extending
her arms towards him; "she is not dead,--it is not possible! Let me have
her, and I shall be able to warm her in my arms."

The curiosity of the idiot was excited by observing the pertinacity with
which the bailiffs kept close to the lapidary, who would not part with
the body of his child. She ceased her yells and cries, and, rising from
her mattress, approached gently, protruded her hideous, senseless
countenance over Morel's shoulder, staring in vacant wonder at the pale
corpse of her grandchild, the features of the idiot retaining their
usual expression of stupid sullenness. At the end of a few minutes, she
uttered a sort of horrible yawning noise, almost resembling the roar of
a famished animal; then, hurrying back to her mattress, she threw
herself upon it, exclaiming:

"Hungry! hungry! hungry!"

"Well, gentlemen," said the poor, half-crazed artisan, with haggard
looks, "you see all that is left me of my poor child, my Adèle,--we
called her Adèle, she was so pretty she deserved a pretty name; and she
was just four years old last night. Ay, and this morning even I kissed
her, and she put her little arms about my neck and embraced me,--oh, so
fondly! And now, you see, gentlemen, perhaps you will tell me there is
one mouth less to feed, and that I am lucky to get rid of one,--you
think so, don't you?"

The unfortunate man's reason was fast giving way under the many shocks
he had received.

"Morel," cried Madeleine, "give me my child! I will have her!"

"To be sure," replied the lapidary; "that is only fair. Everybody ought
to secure their own happiness!" So saying, he laid the child in its
mother's arms, and uttering a groan, such as comes only from a breaking
heart, he covered his face with his hands; while Madeleine, almost as
frenzied as her husband, placed the body of her child amid the straw of
her wretched bed, watching it with frantic jealousy, while the other
children, kneeling around her, filled the air with their wailings.

The bailiffs, who had experienced a temporary feeling of compassion at
the death of the child, soon fell back into their accustomed brutality.

"I say, friend," said Malicorne to the lapidary, "your child is dead,
and there's an end of it! I dare say you think it a misfortune; but
then, you see, we are all mortal, and neither we nor you can bring it
back to life. So come along with us; for, to tell you the truth, we're
upon the scent of a spicy one we must nab to-day. So don't delay us,
that's a trump!"

But Morel heard not a word he said. Entirely preoccupied with his own
sad thoughts, the bewildered man kept up a kind of wandering delivery of
his own afflicting ideas.

"My poor Adèle!" murmured he; "we must now see about laying you in the
grave, and watching by her little corpse till the people come to carry
it to its last home,--to lay it in the ground. But how are we to do that
without a coffin,--and where shall we get one? Who will give me credit
for one? Oh, a very small coffin will do,--only for a little creature of
four years of age! And we shall want no bearers! Oh, no, I can carry it
under my arm. Ha! ha! ha!" added he, with a burst of frightful mirth;
"what a good thing it is she did not live to be as old as Louise! I
never could have persuaded anybody to trust me for a coffin large enough
for a girl of eighteen years of age."

"I say, just look at that chap!" said Bourdin to Malicorne. "I'll be
dashed if I don't think as he's a-going mad, like the old woman there!
Only see how he rolls his eyes about,--enough to frighten one! Come, I
say, let's make haste and be off. Only hark, how that idiot creature is
a-roaring for something to eat! Well, they are rum customers, from
beginning to end!"

"We must get done with them as soon as we can. Although the law only
allows us seventy-six francs, seventy-five centièmes, for arresting this
beggar, yet, in justice to ourselves, we must swell the costs to two
hundred and forty or two hundred and fifty francs. You know the sufferer
(the creditor) pays us!"

"You mean, advances the cash. Old Gaffer there will have to pay the
piper, since he must dance to the music."

"Well, by the time he has paid his creditor 2,500 francs for debt,
interest, and expenses, etc., he'll find it pretty warm work."

"A devilish sight more than we do our job up here! I'm a'most
frost-bitten!" cried the bailiff, blowing the ends of his fingers.
"Come, old fellow, make haste, will you! Just look sharp! You can
snivel, you know, as we go along. Why, how the devil can we help it, if
your brat has kicked the bucket?"

"These beggars always have such a lot of children, if they have nothing
else!"

"Yes, so they have," responded Malicorne. Then, slapping Morel on the
shoulder, he called out in a loud voice, "I tell you what it is, my
friend, we're not going to be kept dawdling here all day,--our time is
precious. So either out with the stumpy, or march off to prison,
without any more bother!"

"Prison!" exclaimed a clear, youthful voice; "take M. Morel to prison!"
and a bright, beaming face appeared at the door.

"Ah, Mlle. Rigolette," cried the weeping children, as they recognised
the happy, healthful countenance of their young protectress and friend,
"these wicked men are going to take our poor father away, and put him in
prison! And sister Adèle is just dead!"

"Dead!" cried the kind-hearted girl, her dark eyes filling with
compassionating tears; "poor little thing! But it cannot be true that
your father is in danger of a prison;" and, almost stupefied with
surprise, she gazed alternately from the children to Morel, and from him
to the bailiffs.

"I say, my girl," said Bourdin, approaching Rigolette, "as you do seem
to have the use of your senses, just make this good man hear reason,
will you? His child has just died. Well, that can't be helped now; but,
you see, he is a-keeping of us, because we're a-waiting to take him to
the debtors' prison, being sheriffs' officers, duly sworn in and
appointed. Tell him so!"

"Then it is true!" exclaimed the feeling girl.

"True? I should say it was and no mistake! Now, don't you see, while the
mother is busy with the dead babby--and, bless you! she's got it there,
hugging it up in bed, and won't part with it!--she won't notice us? So I
want the father to be off while she isn't thinking nothing about it!"

"Good God! Good God!" replied Rigolette, in deep distress; "what is to
be done?"

"Done? Why, pay the money, or go to prison! There is nothing between
them two ways. If you happen to have two or three thousand francs by you
you can oblige him with, why, shell out, and we'll be off, and glad
enough to be gone!"

"How can you," cried Rigolette, "be so barbarous as to make a jest of
such distress as this?"

"Well, then," rejoined the other man, "all joking apart, if you really
do wish to be useful, try to prevent the woman from seeing us take her
husband away. You will spare them both a very disagreeable ten minutes!"

Coarse as was this counsel, it was not destitute of good sense; and
Rigolette, feeling she could do nothing else, approached the bedside of
Madeleine, who, distracted by her grief, appeared unconscious of the
presence of Rigolette, as, gathering the children together, she knelt
with them beside their afflicted mother.

Meanwhile Morel, upon recovering from his temporary wildness, had sunk
into a state of deep and bitter reflections upon his present position,
which, now that his mind saw things through a calmer medium, only
increased the poignancy of his sufferings. Since the notary had
proceeded to such extremities, any hope from his mercy was vain. He felt
there was nothing left but to submit to his fate, and let the law take
its course.

"Are we ever to get off?" inquired Bourdin. "I tell you what, my man, if
you are not for marching, we must make you, that's all."

"I cannot leave these diamonds about in this manner,--my wife is half
distracted," cried Morel, pointing to the stones lying on his
work-table. "The person for whom I am polishing them will come to fetch
them away either this morning or during the day. They are of
considerable value."

"Capital!" whispered Tortillard, who was still peeping in at the half
closed door; "capital, capital! What will Mother Chouette say when I
tell her this bit of luck?"

"Only give me till to-morrow," said Morel, beseechingly; "only till I
can return these diamonds to my employer."

"I tell you, the thing can't be done. So let's have no more to say about
it."

"But it is impossible for me to leave diamonds of such value as these
exposed, to be lost or even stolen in my absence."

"Well, then, take them along with you. We have got a coach waiting
below, for which you will have to pay when you settle the costs. We will
go all together to your employer's house, and, if you don't meet with
him, why, then, you can deposit these jewels at the office of the
prison, where they will be as safe as in the bank; only look sharp, and
let's be off before your wife and children perceive us."

"Give me but till to-morrow,--only to bury my child!" implored Morel, in
a supplicating voice, half stifled by the heavy sobs he strove in vain
to repress.

"Nonsense, I tell you; why, we have lost an hour here already!"

"Besides, it's dull work going to berrins," chimed in Malicorne. "It
would be too much for your feelings, p'raps."

"Yes," said Morel, bitterly; "it is dull work to see what we would have
given our lives to save laid in the cold earth. But, as you are men,
grant me that satisfaction." Then, looking up, and observing the
nonchalant air with which his prayer was received, he added, "But no,
persons of so much feeling as you are would fear to indulge me, lest I
should find it a gloomy sight. Well, then, at least grant me one word!"

"The deuce take your last words! Why, old chap, there seems no end to
them. Come, put the steam on; make haste," said Malicorne, with brutal
impatience, "or we shall lose t'other gent we're after."

"When did you receive orders to arrest me?"

"Oh, why, judgment was signed four months ago! But it was only yesterday
our officer got instructions to put it in execution."

"Only yesterday! And why has it been delayed so long?"

"How the devil should I know? Come, look about you, and put up your
things."

"Only yesterday? And during the whole day we saw nothing of Louise!
Where can she be? Or what has become of her?" inquired the lapidary
mentally, as he took from his table a small box filled with cotton, in
which he placed his stones. "But never mind all that now. I shall have
plenty of time to think about it when I am in prison."

"Come, look sharp there a bit. Tie up your things to take with you, and
put your clothes on, there's a fine fellow!"

"I have no clothes to tie up, and have nothing whatever to take with me
except these jewels, that I may deposit them at the office of the
prison."

"Well, then, dress yourself as quick as you can."

"I have no other dress than that you now see me in."

"I say, mate," cried Bourdin, "does he really mean to be seen in our
company with such rags as those on?"

"I fear, indeed, I shall shame such gentlemen as you are!" said Morel,
bitterly.

"It don't much signify," replied Malicorne, "as nobody will see us in
the coach."

"Father!" cried one of the children, "mother is calling for you!"

"Listen to me!" said Morel, addressing one of the men with hurried
tones; "if one spark of human pity dwells within you, grant me one
favour! I have not the courage to bid my wife and children farewell; it
would break my heart! And if they see you take me away, they will try to
follow me. I wish to spare all this. Therefore, I beseech you to say, in
a loud voice, that you will come again in three or four days, and
pretend to go away. You can wait for me at the next landing-place, and I
will come to you in less than five minutes; that will spare all the
misery of taking leave. I am quite sure it would be too much for me, and
that I should become mad! I was not far off it a little while ago."

"Not to be caught!" answered Malicorne; "you want to do me! But I'm up
to you! You mean to give us the slip, you old chouse!"

"God of heaven!" cried Morel, with a mixture of grief and indignation,
"has it come to this?"

"I don't think he means what you say," whispered Bourdin to his
companion; "let us do what he asks; we shall never get away unless we
do. I'll stand outside the door; there is no other way of escaping from
this garret; he cannot get away from us."

"Very well. But what a dog-hole! What a place for a man to care about
leaving! Why, a prison will be a palace to it!" Then, addressing Morel,
he said, "Now, then, be quick, and we will wait for you on the next
landing; so make up some pretence for our going."

"Well," said Bourdin in a loud voice, and bestowing a significant look
on the unhappy artisan, "since things are as you say, and as you think
you shall be able to pay us in a short time, why, we shall leave you for
the present, and return in about four or five days; but you must not
disappoint us then, remember!"

"Thank you, gentlemen. I have no doubt I shall be able to pay you then."

The bailiffs then withdrew, while Tortillard, hearing the men talk of
quitting the room, had hastened down-stairs for fear of being detected
listening.

"There, Madame Morel!" said Rigolette, endeavouring to draw the wife of
the lapidary from the state of gloomy abstraction into which she had
fallen, "do you hear that? The men have gone, and left your husband
undisturbed."

"Mother! mother!" exclaimed the children, joyfully, "they have not taken
father away!"

"Morel, Morel!" murmured Madeleine, her brain quite turned, "take one
of those diamonds--take the largest--and sell it; no one will know it,
and then we shall be delivered from our misery; poor little Adèle will
get warm then, and come back to us."

Taking advantage of the instant when no one was observing him, the
lapidary profited by it to steal from the room. One of the men was
waiting for him on the little landing-place, which was also covered only
by the roof; on this small spot opened the door of a garret, which
adjoined the apartment occupied by the Morels, and in which M. Pipelet
kept his dépôt of leather; and, further, this little angular recess, in
which a person could not stand upright, was dignified by the melancholy
porter with the name of his Melodramatic Cabinet, because, by means of a
hole between the lath and plaster, he frequently indulged in the luxury
of woe by witnessing the many touching scenes occasioned by the distress
of the wretched family who dwelt in the garret beyond it. This door had
not escaped the lynx eye of the bailiff, who had, for a time, suspected
his prisoner of intending either to escape or conceal himself by means
of it.

"Now, then, let us make a start of it!" cried he, beginning to descend
the stairs as Morel emerged from the garret. "Rather a ragged recruit to
march with," added he, beckoning to the lapidary to follow him.

"Only an instant, one single instant, for the love of God!" exclaimed
Morel, as, kneeling down, he cast a last look on his wife and children
through a chink in the door. Then clasping his hands, he said, in a low,
heart-broken voice, while bitter tears flowed down his haggard cheeks:

"Adieu, my poor children! my wife! May Heaven preserve you all!
Farewell, farewell!"

"Come, don't get preaching!" said Bourdin, coarsely, "or your sermons
may keep us here till night, which is what I can't stand, for I am
almost froze to death as it is. Ugh! what a kennel! what a hole!"

Morel rose from his knees and was about to follow the bailiff, when the
words, "Father! father!" sounded up the staircase.

"Louise!" exclaimed the lapidary, raising his hands towards heaven in a
transport of gratitude; "thank God I shall be able to embrace you before
I go!"

"Heaven be praised, I am here in time!" cried the voice, as it rapidly
approached, and quick, light steps were distinguishable, swiftly
ascending the stairs.

"Don't be uneasy, my dear," said a second voice, evidently proceeding
from some individual considerably behind the first speaker, but whose
thick puffing and laborious breathing announced the coming of one who
did not find mounting to the top of the house so easy an affair as it
seemed to her light-footed companion.

The reader may, perhaps, have already guessed that the last comer was no
other than Madame Pipelet, who, less agile than Louise, was compelled to
advance at a much slower pace.

"Louise! Is it, indeed, you, my own, my good Louise?" said Morel, still
weeping. "But how pale you look! For mercy's sake, my child, what is the
matter?"

"Nothing, father, nothing, I assure you!" said Louise, in much
agitation; "but I have run so fast! See, I have brought the money!"

"What?"

"You are free!"

"You knew, then, that--"

"Oh, yes! Here, sir, you will find it quite right," said the poor girl,
placing the rouleau of gold in the hands of Malicorne.

"But this money, Louise,--how did you become possessed of it?"

"I will tell you all about it by and by; pray do not be uneasy; let us
go and comfort my mother. Come, father."

"No, not just this minute!" cried Morel, remembering that, as yet,
Louise was entirely ignorant of the death of her little sister; "wait an
instant. I have something to say to you first. But about this money?"

"All right," said Malicorne, as, having finished counting the gold, he
put it in his pocket; "precisely one thousand three hundred francs. And
is that all you have got for me, my pretty dear?"

"I thought, father," said Louise, struck with alarm and surprise at the
man's question, "that you only owed one thousand three hundred francs."

"Nor do I," replied Morel.

"Precisely so!" answered the bailiff; "the original debt is one thousand
three hundred francs; well, that is all right now, and we may put
'settled' against that: but then, you see, there are the costs, caption,
etc., amounting to eleven hundred and forty francs, still to be paid."

"Gracious heavens!" cried Louise, "I thought one thousand three hundred
francs would pay everything! But, sir, we will make up the money, and
bring it to you very soon; take this for the present, it is a good sum;
take it as paid on account; it will go towards the debt, at least, won't
it, father?"

"Very well; then all you have to do is to bring the required sum to the
prison, and then, and not till then, your father--if he is your
father--will be set at liberty. Come, master, we must start, or we never
shall get there."

"Do you really mean to take him away?"

"Do I? Don't I? Just look here; I am ready to give you a memorandum of
having received so much on account; and, whenever you bring the rest,
you shall have a receipt in full, and your father along with it. There,
now, that's a handsome offer, ain't it?"

"Mercy! mercy!" supplicated Louise.

"Whew!" cried the man, "here's a scene over again! My stars, I hope this
one isn't a-going mad, too, for the whole family seems uncommon queer
about the head! Well, I declare I never see anything like it! It is
enough to set a man 'prespiring' in the midst of winter!" and here the
bailiff burst into a loud, coarse laugh at his own brutal wit.

"Oh, my poor, dear father!" exclaimed Louise, almost distractedly; "when
I had hoped to have saved you!"

"No, no!" cried the lapidary, in a tone of utter despair, and stamping
his foot in wild desperation, "hope nothing for me; God has forgotten
me, and Heaven has ceased to be just to a wretch like me!"

"Calm yourself, my worthy friend," said a rich, manly voice; "there is
always a kind Providence that watches over and preserves good and honest
men like you."

At the same instant Rodolph appeared at the door of the small recess we
have spoken of, from whence he had been an invisible spectator of much
that we have related; he was pale, and extremely agitated. At this
sudden apparition the bailiff drew back, with surprise; while Morel and
his daughter gazed on the stranger with bewildered wonder. Taking from
his waistcoat pocket a quantity of folded bank-notes, Rodolph selected
three, and, presenting them to Malicorne, he said:

"Here are two thousand five hundred francs; give this young woman back
the money you have just received from her."

Still more and more astonished at this singular interference, the man
half hesitated to take the notes, and, when he had received them, he
eyed them with the utmost suspicion, turning and twisting them about in
every direction; at length, satisfied both as to their reality and
genuineness, he finally deposited them in his pocketbook: but, as his
surprise and alarm began to subside, so did his natural coarseness of
idea return, and, eyeing Rodolph from head to foot with an impertinent
stare, he exclaimed:

"The notes are right enough; but pray who and what are you that go about
with such sums? I should just wish to know whose it is, and how you came
by it?"

Rodolph was very plainly dressed, and his appearance by no means
improved by the dust and dirt his clothes had gathered during his stay
in M. Pipelet's Cabinet of Melodrama.

"I desired you to give back the gold you received just now from this
young person," replied Rodolph, in a severe and authoritative tone.

"You desired me! And who the devil are you, to give your orders?"
answered the man, approaching Rodolph in a threatening manner.

"Give back the gold! Give it back, I say!" said the prince, grasping the
wrist of Malicorne so tightly that the unhappy bailiff winced beneath
his iron clutch.

"I say," bawled he, "hands off, will you? Curse me if I don't think
you're old Nick himself! I am sure your fingers are cased with iron."

"Then return the money! Why, you despicable wretch! do you want to be
paid twice over? Now return the gold and begone, or, if you utter one
insolent word, I'll fling you over the banisters!"

"Well, don't kick up such a row! There's the girl's money," said
Malicorne, giving back to Louise the rouleau he had received. "But mind
what you are about, my sparky, and don't think to ill-use me because you
happen to be the strongest!"

"That's right!" said Bourdin, ensconcing himself behind his taller
associate. "And who are you, I should like to know, who give yourself
such airs?"

"Who is he? Why, my lodger, my king of lodgers, you ill-looking,
half-starved, hungry hounds! you ill-taught, dirty fellows!" exclaimed
Madame Pipelet, who, puffing and panting for breath, had at last reached
the landing where they stood; her head, as usual, adorned with her
Brutus wig, which, during the heat and bustle she had experienced in
ascending the stairs, had got pushed somewhat awry, while in her hand
she bore an earthen stewpan, filled with smoking-hot broth, which she
was charitably conveying to the Morels.

"What the devil does this old hedgehog want?" cried Bourdin.

"If you dare make any of your saucy speeches about me," returned Madame
Pipelet, "I'll make you feel my nails,--ay, and my teeth, too, if you
provoke me! And, if you don't mend your manners, my lodger, my king of
lodgers will pitch you over the banisters, and I will sweep you out into
the street, as I would a heap of rubbish."

"This old beldam will bring the whole house about our ears," said
Bourdin to Malicorne; "we've touched the blunt, our expenses and all, so
I say 'Off' is a good word."

"Here, take your property," said the latter, flinging a bundle of
law-papers at the feet of Morel.

"Pick them up, and deliver them decently; you have been paid as a
respectable officer would have been, act like one!" cried Rodolph,
seizing the bailiff vigorously with one hand, while with the other he
pointed to the papers.

Fully convinced by this second powerful grip how useless any attempt at
resistance would prove, the bailiff stooped down, and, mechanically
picking up the papers, gave them to Morel, who, scarcely venturing to
credit his senses, believed himself under the influence of a delightful
dream.

"Well, young chap," grumbled out Malicorne, "although you have got a
fist as strong as a drayman's, mind you, if ever you fall into my
clutches, I'll make you smart for this!" So saying, he doubled his fist
at Rodolph, and then scrambled down the stairs, taking four or five at a
time, followed by his companion, who kept looking behind him with
indescribable terror; while Madame Pipelet, burning to avenge the
insults offered to her king of lodgers, looked at her steaming stewpan
with an air of inspiration, and heroically exclaimed:

"The debts of the Morels are paid! Henceforward they will have plenty of
food, and can do without my messes! Look out there below!"

So saying, she stooped over the banisters, and poured the contents of
her stewpan down the backs and shoulders of the two bailiffs, who had
just reached the first floor landing.

"There goes!" screamed out the delighted porteress. "Capital! Ha, ha,
ha! there they are! two regular sops, in the pan! Well, I do enjoy
this!"

"What the devil is this?" exclaimed Malicorne, thoroughly soaked with
the hot, greasy liquid. "I say, I wish you would mind what you are about
up there, you old figure of fun!"

"Alfred!" bawled Madame Pipelet, in a tone sharp and shrill enough to
have split the tympanum of a deaf man; "Alfred, my old darling, have at
'em! They wanted to behave ill to your 'Stasie (Anastasie)! The nasty
fellows have been taking liberties,--quite violent! Knock them down with
your broom! And call the oyster-woman, and the man at the wine-vaults,
to help you! Get out, you! Get--get--get out! Cht, cht, cht! Thieves!
thieves! robbers! Cht--b-r-r-r-r-r-r--hou, hou, hou! Knock them--knock
them down! That's right, old dear! Pay them off! Break their bones!
Serve them out! Boum, boum, boum!"

And, by way of conclusion to this concatenation of discordant noises,
accompanied by a constant succession of stamping and kicking of feet,
Madame Pipelet, carried away by the excitement of the moment, flung her
earthen stewpan to the bottom of the staircase, which, breaking into a
thousand pieces at the very instant that the two bailiffs, terrified by
the yells and noises from overhead, were precipitately descending the
stairs with hasty strides, added not a little to their terror.

"Ah, ah, ah!" cried Anastasie, bursting into loud fits of laughter. "Now
be off with you,--I think you have had enough!" Then, crossing her arms,
she stood, like a triumphant Amazon, rejoicing in the victory she had
achieved.

While Madame Pipelet was thus venting her rage upon the bailiffs, Morel
had thrown himself, in heartfelt gratitude, at the feet of Rodolph.

"Ah, sir," exclaimed he, when at last words came to his assistance, "you
have saved a whole family! To whom do we owe this unhoped-for
assistance?"

"'To the God who watches over and protects all honest men,' as your
immortal Béranger says."


   NOTE.--The following are some curious particulars relative to
   bodily restraint, as cited in the "Pauvre Jacques," a journal
   published under the patronage of the "Society for the
   Furtherance and Protection of Christianity:"

           (Prison Committee.)   (_Comité des Prisons._)

   "A protest and intimation of bodily restraint are generally
   carried about by sheriffs' officers, and charged by law, the
   first, 4_f._ 35_c._, the second, 4_f._ 70_c._; for these,
   however, the officers usually demand, for the former, 10_f._
   40_c._, for the second, 16_f._ 40_c._; thus illegally claiming
   from the unfortunate victims of law 26_f._ 80_c._, for that
   which is fixed by that very law at 9_f._ 50_c._

   "For an arrest, the legal charge is, including stamp and
   registering, 3_f._ 50_c._; coach-hire, 5_f._; for arrest and
   entry in the prison books, 60_f._ 25_c._; office dues, 8_f._
   Total, 76_f._ 75_c._ A bill of the usual scale ordinarily
   charged by sheriffs' officers, now lying before us, shows that
   these allowances by law are magnified by the extortion of the
   officers into a sum of about 240_f._, instead of the 76_f._ they
   are alone entitled to claim."

   The same journal says: "Sheriffs' officer ---- has been to our
   office, requesting us to correct an article which appeared in
   one of our numbers, headed, 'A woman hung.' 'I did not hang the
   woman!' observed he, angrily. We did not assert that he did,
   but, to prevent any further misapprehension, content ourselves
   with reprinting the paragraph in question: 'A few days ago, a
   sheriffs' officer, named ----, went to the Rue de la Lune, to
   arrest a carpenter, who dwelt there. The man, perceiving him
   from the street, rushed hastily into his house, exclaiming, "I
   am a ruined man! The officers are here to arrest me!" His wife,
   at these words, hastened to secure the door; while the carpenter
   ran to a room on the top of the house, to conceal himself. The
   officer, finding admittance refused, went and fetched a
   magistrate and a blacksmith; the door was forced, and, on
   proceeding up-stairs, the woman was found hanging in her own
   bedchamber. The officer did not allow himself to be diverted
   from the pursuit by the sight of the corpse; he continued his
   search, and at length discovered the husband in his
   hiding-place. "I arrest you!" cried the bailiff. "I have no
   money!" replied the man. "Then you must go to prison." "Let me
   at least bid my wife adieu!" "It is not worth while waiting for
   that,--your wife is dead! She has hung herself!"' Now, M. ----
   (adds the journal we have quoted), what have you to say to that?
   You see we have merely copied your own statement upon oath, in
   which you have detailed all these frightful circumstances with
   horrible minuteness!"

   The same journal also cites two or three hundred similar facts,
   of which the following may serve as a specimen: "The expenses
   upon a note of hand for 300_f._ have been run up by the
   sheriffs' officers to 964_f._; the debtor, therefore, who is a
   mere artisan, with a family of five children, has been detained
   in prison for the last seven months!"

   The author of this work had a double reason for borrowing thus
   largely from the pages of the "Pauvre Jacques." In the first
   place, to show that the horrors of the last chapter are far
   below reality in their painful details. And secondly, to prove
   that, if only viewed in a philanthropic light, the allowing such
   a state of things to go on (namely, the exorbitant and illegal
   fees both demanded and exacted by certain public functionaries),
   frequently acts as a preventive to the exercise of benevolence,
   and paralyses the hand of charity. Thus, were a small capital of
   1000_f._ collected among kind-hearted individuals, three or four
   honest, though unfortunate, artisans might be released from a
   prison and restored to their families, by employing the
   above-named sum in paying the debts of such as were incarcerated
   for amounts varying from 250 to 300_f._! But when the original
   debt is increased threefold by the excessive and illegal
   expenses, even the most charitable recede from the good work of
   delivering a fellow creature, from the impression that
   two-thirds of their well-intentioned bounty would only go into
   the pockets of pampered sheriffs' officers and their satellites.
   And yet no class of unfortunate beings stand more in need of aid
   and charitable assistance than the unfortunate class we have
   just been speaking of.




CHAPTER XIV.

RIGOLETTE.


Louise, the daughter of the lapidary, was possessed of more than
ordinary loveliness of countenance, a fine, tall, graceful person,
uniting, by the strict regularity of her faultless features and elegance
of her figure, the classic beauty of Juno with the lightness and
elegance assigned to the statue of the hunting Diana. Spite of the
injury her complexion had received from exposure to weather, and the
redness of her well-shaped hands and arms, occasioned by household
labour,--despite even the humble dress she wore, the whole appearance of
Louise Morel was stamped with that indescribable air of grace and
superiority Nature sometimes is pleased to bestow upon the lowly-born,
in preference to the descendant of high lineage.

We shall not attempt to paint the joy, the heartfelt gratitude of this
family, so wondrously preserved from so severe a calamity; even the
recent death of the little girl was forgotten during the first burst of
happiness. Rodolph alone found leisure to remark the extreme paleness
and utter abstraction of Louise, whose first ecstasy at finding her
father free passed away, apparently plunged in a deep and painful
reverie. Anxious to relieve the mind of Morel of any apprehensions for
the future, and also to explain a liberality which might have raised
suspicions as to the character he chose to assume, Rodolph drew the
lapidary to the further end of the staircase, leaving to Rigolette the
task of acquainting Louise with the death of her little sister, and said
to him:

"Did not a young lady come to visit you and your family on the morning
of the day before yesterday?"

"Yes, and appeared much grieved to see the distress we were in."

"Then you must thank her,--not me."

"Can it be possible, sir? That young lady--"

"Is your benefactress. I frequently wait upon her from our warehouse;
when I hired an apartment here, I learned from the porteress all the
particulars of your case, and the painful situation you were placed in;
relying on this lady's well-known kindness and benevolence, I hastened
to acquaint her with all I had heard respecting you; and, the day before
yesterday, she came herself, in order to be fully aware of the extent of
your misery. The distress she witnessed deeply affected her; but as it
might have been brought about by misconduct, she desired me to take upon
myself the task of inquiring into every circumstance relative to your
past and present condition with as little delay as possible, being
desirous of regulating her benevolent aid by the good or bad accounts
she might receive of your honesty and good conduct."

"Kind, excellent lady! Well might I say--"

"As you observed just now to Madeleine, 'If the rich did but know!'--was
not that it?"

"Is it possible that you are acquainted with the name of my wife? Who
could have told you that?"

"My worthy friend," said Rodolph, interrupting Morel, "I have been
concealed in the little garret adjoining your attic since six o'clock
this morning."

"Have you, indeed, sir?"

"Yes, my honest fellow, I have, and from my hiding-place heard all that
passed among you."

"Oh, sir! but why did you do so?"

"I could not have employed more satisfactory means of getting at your
real character and sentiments; and I was desirous of seeing and hearing
all you did or said without your being aware of my presence. The porter
had made me acquainted with this small retreat, which he offered to me
for a wood-closet. This morning, I asked his permission to visit it, and
remained there more than an hour, during which time I had ample proof
that a more upright, noble mind did not exist, and that the courageous
resignation with which you bore your heavy trials was above all praise."

"Nay, indeed, sir, I do not merit such words as these. I was born
honest, I hope, and it comes natural to me to act as I have done."

"I am quite sure of that; therefore I do not laud your conduct, I
appreciate it. Just as I was about to quit my hiding-place, to relieve
you of the presence of the bailiffs, I heard the voice of your daughter,
and I meant to have allowed her the happiness of saving you. Unhappily,
the rapacity of the men deprived poor Louise of the full completion of
her pious task. I then made my appearance. Fortunately, I yesterday
received several sums that were due to me, so that I was enabled to
advance the money for your benefactress, and to pay off your unfortunate
debt. But your distress has been so great, so unmerited, and so nobly
sustained, that the well-deserved interest you have excited shall not
stop here; and I take upon myself, in the name of your preserving angel,
to promise you henceforward calmness, peace, and happiness, for yourself
and family."

"Can it be possible? But, at least, sir, let me beseech you to tell me
the name of this angel of goodness,--this heavenly preserver,--that it
may dwell in our hearts and on our lips! By what name shall we bless her
in our prayers?"

"Think of her and speak of her as the angel she is. Ah, you were right
in saying just now that both rich and poor had their sorrows!"

"And is this dear lady, then, unhappy?"

"Who is free from care and suffering in this world of trial? But I see
no cause for concealing from you the name of your protectress. The lady,
then, is named--"

Remembering that Madame Pipelet was aware of Madame d'Harville's having,
at her first coming to the house, inquired for the commandant, and
fearing her indiscreet mention of the circumstance, Rodolph resumed,
after a short pause:

"I will venture to tell you this lady's name, upon one condition--"

"Pray go on, sir."

"That you never mention it again to any one,--mind, I say to any person
whatever."

"I solemnly promise you never to let it pass my lips; but may I not hope
to be permitted to thank this friend of the unfortunate?"

"I will let Madame d'Harville know your wish; but I scarcely think she
will consent to it."

"Then this generous lady is called--"

"The Marquise d'Harville."

"Never will that name be forgotten by me! Henceforward it will be to me
as that of my patron saint,--the object of my grateful worship! Oh, when
I remember that, thanks to her, my wife, children,--all, are
saved!--saved--no, no, not all,--my little Adèle has gone from us! We
shall see her sweet face no more; but still, I know we must have parted
with her sooner or later; the dear child's doom was long since decreed!"

Here the poor lapidary wiped away the tears which filled his eyes at the
recollection of his lost darling.

"As for the last duties that have now to be performed for your poor
child," said Rodolph, "if you will be guided by me, this is how we will
arrange it. I have not yet begun to occupy my chamber; it is large,
airy, and convenient. There is already one bed in it; and I will give
orders to add all that may be requisite for the accommodation of
yourself and family, until Madame d'Harville is enabled to find an
eligible abode for you. The remains of your little daughter can then be
left in your attic, where, until the period of interment, they can be
properly watched and guarded by a priest with all requisite attention. I
will request M. Pipelet to take upon himself every necessary arrangement
for the mournful office of laying the poor babe in its peaceful grave."

"Nay, sir,--but, indeed, I cannot allow you to be turned out of your
apartment! Now that we are so happily freed from our misery, and that I
have no longer the dread of being dragged to prison, our poor garret
will seem to me like a palace,--more especially if my Louise remains to
watch over the family as she used to do."

"Your daughter shall never again quit you. You said, awhile ago, that
the first desire of your heart was to have Louise always with you. Well
then, as a reward for your past sufferings, I promise you she shall
never leave you more."

"Oh, sir, this is too much; it cannot be reality! It seems as though I
were dreaming some happy dream. I fear I have never been as religious as
I ought. I have, in fact, known no other religion than that of honour.
But such a reverse, such a change from wretchedness to joy, would make
even an atheist believe, if not in priests, at least in a gracious,
interposing, and preserving Providence."

"And if," said Rodolph, sadly, "a father's sorrow for the loss of his
child can be assuaged by promises of rewards or recompense, I would say
that the heavenly hand which takes one child from you gives you back the
other."

"True,--most true! And henceforward our dear Louise will be with us to
help us to forget our poor Adèle."

"Then you will accept the offer of my chamber, will you not? Or else how
shall we be able to arrange for the mournful duties to the poor infant?
Think of your wife, whose head is already in so weak a state. It will
never do to allow her to remain with so afflicting a spectacle
constantly before her eyes."

"What goodness," exclaimed the lapidary, "thus to remember all,--to
think of all! Oh, you are indeed a friend! May Heaven bless and
recompense you!"

"Come, you must reserve your thanks for the excellent lady you term your
protecting angel. 'Tis her goodness inspires me with a desire to imitate
her benevolence and charity. I feel assured I am but speaking as she
would speak, were she here, and that all I do she will fully approve. So
now, then, it is arranged you will occupy my room. But, just tell me,
this Jacques Ferrand--"

The forehead of Morel became clouded over at the mention of this name.

"I suppose," continued Rodolph, "there is no doubt as to his being the
same Jacques Ferrand who practises as a notary in the Rue du Sentier?"

"None whatever, sir," answered Morel; "but do you know him?" Then,
assailed afresh by his fears for Louise, the lapidary continued: "Since
you overheard all our conversation, tell me, sir,--tell me, do you not
think I have just cause to hate this man, as I do? For who knows but my
daughter--my Louise--"

The unhappy artisan could not proceed; he groaned with anguish, and
concealed his face with his hands.

Rodolph easily divined the nature of his apprehensions.

"The very step taken by the notary ought to reassure your mind," said
he, "as, there can be no doubt, he was instigated by revenge for your
daughter's rejection of his improper advances to proceed to the hostile
measures adopted. However, I have every reason to believe he is a very
bad and dangerous man; and if my suspicions respecting him are
realised," said Rodolph, after a few moments' silence, "then rely on
Providence to punish him. If the just vengeance of the Almighty seems
occasionally to slumber, it awakens, sooner or later."

"He is both rich and hypocritical!" cried the lapidary.

"At the moment of your deepest despair, a guardian angel appeared to
save you from ruin; so, at the moment when least expected, will an
inexorable Avenger call upon the notary to atone for his past crimes, if
he be guilty."

At this moment Rigolette came out of the miserable garret belonging to
Morel; the kind-hearted girl had evidently been shedding tears, and was
trying to dry her eyes before she descended the stairs. Directly Rodolph
perceived her, he exclaimed:

"Tell me, my good neighbour, will it not be much better for M. Morel and
his family to occupy my chamber while they are waiting till his
benefactress, whose agent I am, shall have found a comfortable residence
for him?"

Rigolette surveyed Rodolph with an air of unfeigned surprise.

"Really," cried she, at length, "are you in earnest in making so kind
and considerate an offer?"

"Quite so, on one condition, which depends on yourself."

"Oh, all that is in my power!"

"You see, I had some rather difficult accounts to arrange for my
employer, which are wanted as early as possible,--indeed, I expect they
will be sent for almost directly; my papers are in my room. Now would
you be neighbourly enough to let me bring my work into your apartment,
and just spare a little corner of your table? I should not disturb your
work the least in the world, and then the whole of the Morel family, by
the assistance of Madame Pipelet and her husband, may be at once
established in my apartment."

"Certainly I will, and with great pleasure; neighbours should always be
ready to help and oblige each other. I am sure, after all you have done
for poor M. Morel, you have set a good example; so I shall be very glad
to give you all the assistance in my power, monsieur."

"No, no,--don't call me monsieur! say 'my dear friend,' or 'neighbour,'
whichever you prefer; unless you lay aside all ceremony, I shall not
have courage to intrude myself and papers into your room," said Rodolph,
smiling.

"Well, pray don't let that be any hindrance; then, if you like, I'll
call you 'neighbour,' because, you know, you are so."

"Father! father!" said one of Morel's little boys, coming out of the
garret, "mother is calling for you! Make haste, father,--pray do!"

The lapidary hastily followed the child back to his chamber.

"Now, then, neighbour," said Rodolph to Rigolette, "you must do me one
more service."

"With all my heart, if it lies in my power to do so."

"I feel quite sure you are a clever manager and housekeeper; now we must
go to work at once to provide the Morels with comfortable clothing, and
such matters as may be essential for their accommodation in my
apartment, which at present merely contains my slender stock of
bachelor's furniture, sent in yesterday. Beds, bedding, and a great
quantity of requisites will be needed for so many persons; and I want
you to assist me in procuring them all the comforts I wish them to have
with as little delay as possible."

Rigolette reflected a moment, and then replied:

"You shall have all this before two hours have passed: good clothes,
nicely made, warm and comfortable, good white linen for all the family,
two small beds for the children, one for the grandmother, and, in fact,
all that is required; but, I can tell you, all this will cost a great,
great deal of money."

"_Diable!_ and how much?"

"Oh, at least--the very least, five or six hundred francs."

"For everything?"

"Yes; you see it is a great sum of money," said Rigolette, opening her
eyes very wide and shaking her head.

"But we could procure all this?"

"Within two hours."

"My little neighbour, you must be a fairy!"

"Oh, no! it is easy enough. The Temple is but two steps from here, and
you will get there everything you require."

"The Temple?"

"Yes, the Temple."

"What place is that?"

"What, neighbour, don't you know the Temple?"

"No, neighbour."

"Yet it is the place where such persons as you and I fit themselves out
in furniture and clothes, when they are economical. It is much cheaper
than any other place, and the things are also good."

"Really!"

"I think so. Well, now, I suppose--how much did you pay for your
greatcoat?"

"I cannot say precisely."

"What, neighbour! not know how much you gave for your greatcoat?"

"I will tell you, in confidence, neighbour," said Rodolph, smiling,
"that I owe for it; so, you see, I cannot exactly say."

"Oh, neighbour, neighbour, you do not appear to me to be very orderly in
your habits!"

"Alas, neighbour, I fear not!"

"I must cure you of that, if you desire that we should continue friends;
and I see already that we shall be, for you seem so kind! You will not
be sorry to have me for a neighbour, I can see. You will assist me and I
shall assist you,--we are neighbours, and that's why. I shall look after
your linen; you will give me your help in cleaning my room. I am up very
early in the morning, and will call you, that you may not be late in
going to your work; I will knock against the wainscot until you say to
me, 'Good morning, neighbour!'"

"That's agreed; you shall awaken me, you shall take charge of my linen,
and I will clean out your room."

"Certainly. And, when you have anything to buy, you must go to the
Temple; for see now, for example, your greatcoat must have cost you
eighty francs, I have no doubt; well, you might have bought one just as
good at the Temple for thirty francs."

"Really, that is marvellous! And so you think that for four or five
hundred francs these poor Morels--"

"Will be completely set up, and very comfortable for a long while."

"Neighbour, an idea comes across me."

"Well, what is this idea?"

"Do you understand all about household affairs?"

"Yes; I should think so," said Rigolette, with a slight affectation of
manner.

"Take my arm, then, and let us go to the Temple and buy all these things
for the Morels; won't that be a good way?"

"Oh, how capital! Poor souls! But, then, the money?"

"I have it."

"What, five hundred francs?"

"The benefactor of the Morels has given me _carte blanche_; and she
will spare nothing to see these poor people restored to comfort. Is
there any place where we can buy better supplies than at the Temple?"

"Certainly not; you will not find better things anywhere; and then there
is everything, and all ready, there; little frocks for children, and
gowns for the mother."

"Well, then, neighbour, let us go at once to the Temple:"

"Ah, _mon Dieu_! but--"

"What?"

"Nothing; only, you see, my time is everything to me, and I am already a
little behindhand, through coming here to watch over poor Madame Morel;
and you must know that an hour in one way, and an hour in another, that
by little and little makes whole days; well, a day is thirty sous, and,
whether we gain something or nothing, we must live; but bah! never mind.
I will make up for that at night, and then, d'ye see, parties of
pleasure are very rare, and I call this one. It will seem to me that I
am rich, rich, rich, and that it is with my own money that I shall buy
all these things for the Morels. So come along, neighbour, I will throw
on my shawl and cap, and then I am ready."

"Suppose, whilst you are doing this, I bring my papers to your
apartment?"

"Willingly; and then you will see my room," said Rigolette, with pride,
"for it is all tidy, which will convince you how early I am in the
morning; and that, if you are idle and a sluggard, so much the worse for
you, for I shall be a troublesome neighbour."

So saying, light as a bird, Rigolette descended the staircase, followed
by Rodolph, who went into his own room to brush off the dust which had
settled on him in M. Pipelet's garret. We will hereafter disclose how it
was that Rodolph was not informed of the carrying off of Fleur-de-Marie
from the farm at Bouqueval, and why he had not visited the Morels the
day after his conversation with Madame d'Harville.

Rodolph, furnished, by way of saving appearances, with a thick roll of
papers, entered Rigolette's chamber.

Rigolette was nearly the same age as Goualeuse, her old prison
acquaintance. There was between these two young girls the same
difference that there is between laughter and tears; between joyous
light-heartedness and melancholy dejection; between the wildest
thoughtlessness and a dark and constant reflection on the future;
between a delicate, refined, elevated, poetic nature, exquisitely
sensitive, and incurably wounded by remorse, and a gay, lively, happy,
good, and compassionate nature. Rigolette had no sorrows but those
derived from the woes of others, and with these she sympathised with all
her might, devoting herself, body and soul, to any suffering fellow
creature; but, her back turned on them, to use a common expression, she
thought no more about them. She often checked her bursts of laughter by
a flood of tears, and then checked her tears by renewing her laughter.
Like a real Parisian, Rigolette preferred excitement to calm, and motion
to repose; the loud and echoing harmony of the orchestra at the fête of
the Chartreuse or the Colysée to the soft murmurs of the breeze, waters,
and leaves; the bustling disturbance of the thoroughfares of Paris to
the silent solitude of the fields; the brilliancy of fireworks, the
flaring of the grand finale, the uproar of the maroons and Roman
candles, to the serenity of a lovely night,--starlight, clear, and
still. Alas, yes! the dear, good little girl actually preferred the
pavement of the streets of the capital to the fresh moss of the shaded
paths, perfumed with violets; the dust of the Boulevards to the waving
of the ears of corn, mingled with the scarlet of the wild poppies and
the azure of the bluebells.

Rigolette only left her chamber on Sundays, and each morning to provide
her prescribed allowance of chickweed, bread, milk, and millet, for
herself and her two birds, as Madame Pipelet observed; but she lived in
Paris for Paris, and would have been wretched to have resided anywhere
but in the capital.

A few words as to the personal appearance of the grisette, and we will
then introduce Rodolph into the chamber of his neighbour.

Rigolette was scarcely eighteen years of age, of middle height, rather
small than large, but so gracefully formed, so admirably proportioned,
so delightfully filled out, so entirely in accordance with her step,
which was light and easy, that she seemed perfect of her kind. The
movement of her finely formed feet, always encased in well-made boots of
black cloth, with a rather thick sole, reminded you of the quick,
pretty, and cautious tread of the quail or wagtail. She did not seem to
walk, but to pass over the pavement as if she were gliding over the
surface. This step, so peculiar to grisettes, at once nimble,
attractive, and as if somewhat alarmed, may doubtless be attributed to
three causes: their desire to be thought pretty, their fear of being
mistaken for what they are not, and to the desire they always have not
to lose a minute in their peregrinations.

Rodolph had not seen Rigolette but by the dim light of Morel's garret,
or on the landing-place, equally obscure, and he was therefore really
struck by the bright and fresh countenance of the young girl when he
softly entered her apartment, which was lighted up by two large windows.
He remained motionless for a moment, in admiration of the striking
picture before his eyes. Standing in front of a glass placed over her
mantelpiece, Rigolette was tying under her chin the ribands of a small
cap of bordered tulle, ornamented with a light trimming of
cherry-coloured riband. The cap, which fitted tightly, was placed at the
back of her head, and thus revealed two large and thick bandeaux of
glossy hair, shining like jet, and falling very low in front. Her
eyebrows, fine and well defined, seemed as if traced in ink, and curved
above two large black, piercing, and intelligent eyes; her firm and
velvety cheeks were suffused with the rosy hue of health, fresh to the
eye, fresh to the touch, like a ripe peach covered with the dew of dawn;
her small, upturned, attractive, and saucy nose, would have been a
fortune to any Lisette or Marton; her mouth, which was rather large, had
rosy and moist lips, small, white, close, and pearly teeth, and was
laughter-loving and sportive; three charming dimples, which gave a
characteristic grace to her features, were placed, two in her cheeks,
and the other in her chin, close to a beauty-spot, a small ebony speck,
which was most killingly situated at the corner of her mouth. Between a
worked collar, which fell very low, and the border of the little cap,
gathered in by a cherry-coloured riband, was seen a forest of beautiful
hair, so accurately twisted and turned up that their roots were seen as
clearly and as black as if they had been painted on the ivory of that
lovely neck. A plum-coloured merino gown, with a plain back and close
sleeves, made skilfully by Rigolette, covered a figure so small and
slender that the young girl never wore a corset,--for economy's sake. An
ease and unusual freedom in the smallest action of the shoulders and
body, which resembled the facile undulations of a cat's motions, evinced
this fact. Imagine a gown fitting tightly to a form rounded and polished
as marble, and we must agree that Rigolette could easily dispense with
this accessory to the toilet of which we have spoken. The tie of a small
apron of dark green levantine formed a girdle around a waist which might
have been spanned by the ten fingers.

Believing herself to be alone (for Rodolph still remained at the door,
motionless and unperceived), the grisette, having smoothed down her
bandeaux with her small hand, white and delicately clean, put her small
foot on a chair and stooped to tie the lace of her boot. This attitude
developed to Rodolph a portion of a cotton stocking, white as snow, and
a well-formed ankle and leg.

After the detail we have given of this toilet, we may guess that
Rigolette had selected her prettiest cap and best apron to do honour to
her neighbour on their excursion to the Temple. She found the pretended
tradesman's clerk very much to her taste; his face, at once kind, bold,
and animated, pleased her greatly; and then he had been so kind to the
Morels, by giving up his room to them; so that, thanks to this proof of
goodness, and, perhaps, also to his good looks, Rodolph had unwittingly
advanced into the confidence of the grisette with giant strides. She,
according to her ideas, founded on the compelled intimacy and reciprocal
obligation which neighbourhood invites, thought herself very fortunate
in having such a neighbour as Rodolph to succeed to the travelling
clerk, Cabrion, and François Germain; for she was beginning to find that
the next room had remained very long empty, and was afraid that she
should never again see it occupied in an agreeable manner.

Rodolph took advantage of his invisibility to cast a curious eye around
him, and he found the apartment even beyond the praises which Madame
Pipelet had bestowed on the extreme cleanliness of the humble home of
Rigolette. Nothing could be more lively or better arranged than this
apartment. A gray paper, with green garlands, covered the walls; the
floor, painted of a red colour, shone like a looking-glass; a small
earthenware stone was placed in the chimney, where was piled up, very
symmetrically, a small store of wood, cut so short, so thin, that,
without exaggeration, each piece might have been compared to a very
large match. On the stone mantelpiece, painted gray marble, there were,
for ornaments, two pots of common flowers, covered in with green moss; a
small case of boxwood contained a silver watch instead of a pendule. On
one side was a brass candlestick, shining like gold, and having in it a
small piece of wax-light; and, on the other side, no less
resplendently, one of those lamps formed by a cylinder and a brass
reflector, supported by a bar of steel, and having a base of lead. A
tolerably large square glass, in a black wood frame, was over the
mantelpiece. Curtains of gray and green Persian cloth, with a
woollen-fringed border, cut and worked by Rigolette, and hung in light
rings of black iron, decorated the windows; and the bed was covered with
a counterpane of the same make and material. Two closets, with glass
doors, and painted white, were in each side of the recess, enclosing, no
doubt, household utensils,--the portable stove, the fountain, brooms,
etc.; for none of these things spoiled the neat appearance of the
chamber. A chest of drawers of well veined and shining walnut-tree; four
chairs of the same wood; a large table for ironing and working, covered
with one of those green woollen coverings which we sometimes see in a
peasant's cottage; a straw armchair, with a stool to match, the constant
seat of the workwoman,--such was the unpretending furniture. There was,
too, in one of the window-seats, a cage with two canary birds, the
faithful companions of Rigolette. By one of those notable ideas which
occur to the poor, this cage was placed in the middle of a large wooden
chest, about a foot deep, placed on a table. This chest, which Rigolette
called her bird's garden, was filled with mould, covered with moss
during the winter, and in spring the young girl sowed grass seeds, and
planted flowers there. Rodolph examined the place with interest, and
entered fully into the cheerful disposition of the grisette. He pictured
to himself this solitude, enlivened by the song of the birds and of
Rigolette herself. In summer, no doubt, she worked at the open window,
half veiled by a verdant curtain of sweet peas, roses, nasturtiums, and
blue and white convolvulus. In winter she warmed herself near her small
stove, by the soft light of her lamp.

Rodolph was thus reflecting, when, looking mechanically at the door, he
saw there a large bolt,--a bolt which would not have been out of place
on the door of a prison. This bolt made him reflect. It might have two
meanings, two very distinct uses: to close the door on the lover within;
to close the door on the lover without. Rodolph was aroused from his
reflections by Rigolette, who, turning her head, saw him, and, without
changing her attitude, said to him:

"What, neighbour, are you there?" Then the well-formed ankle instantly
disappeared beneath the ample skirt of the plum-coloured gown, and
Rigolette added, "Ah, Mr. Cunning!"

"I was here admiring in silence."

"Admiring what, neighbour?"

"This pretty little room; for, neighbour, you are lodged like a queen."

"Why, you must know that is my enjoyment. I never go out, and so I can
do no less than make my home comfortable."

"But really I never saw anything half so nice. What pretty curtains! and
the drawers as handsome as mahogany! You must have spent a great deal of
money here."

"Oh, don't mention it! I had, of my own, four hundred and twenty-five
francs when I left the prison, and almost all has been spent."

"When you left the prison!--you?"

"Yes, but it is a very long story. Of course, you do not suppose that I
was in prison for anything wrong?"

"Of course not; but how was it?"

"After the cholera, I was quite alone in the world. I was then, I think,
ten years of age."

"But who had taken care of you till then?"

"Ah, some excellent people! But they died of the cholera;" here
Rigolette's large eyes became moistened. "They had sold the little they
possessed to pay their small debts, and I remained without having any
one who would take care of me. Not knowing what to do, I went to the
guard-house, opposite to our house, and said to the sentinel: 'Sir, my
relations are dead, and I do not know where to go to; what must I do?'
Then the officer came, and he took me to the commissary, who put me in
prison as a vagabond, and I did not go out until I was sixteen years
old."

"But your relations?"

"I do not know who my father was, and I was six years old when I lost my
mother, who had recovered me from the Enfants Trouvés (Foundling
Hospital), where she had been compelled at first to place me. The kind
people of whom I spoke to you lived in our house; they had no children,
and, seeing me an orphan, they took care of me."

"And what were they? What was their business or pursuit?"

"Papa Crétu, so I always called him, was a house-painter, and his wife
worked at her needle."

"Then they were pretty well off?"

"Oh, like other people in their station, though they were not married;
but they called each other husband and wife. They had their ups and
downs; to-day plenty, if there was work to be had; to-morrow short
commons, if there was none; but that did not prevent the couple from
being content and always cheerful;" at this remembrance Rigolette's face
brightened up. "There was not such a household in the quarter,--always
merry, always singing, and, with it all, as good as they could be. What
they had any one was welcome to share. Mamma Crétu was a plump body,
about thirty years old, as neat as a penny, as active as an eel, as
merry as a lark. Her husband was a regular good-tempered fellow, with a
large nose, a wide mouth, and always a paper cap on his head, and such a
funny face,--oh, so funny,--you could not look at him without laughing.
When he came home after work, he did nothing but sing, and make faces,
and gambol like a child. He used to dance me on his knees, and play
with me like a child of my own age; and his wife spoiled me, as if I had
been a blessing to her. They both required only one thing from me, and
that was to be in a good humour; and in that I never thwarted them,
thank Heaven. So they called me Rigolette,[7] and the name has stuck to
me. As to mirth, they set me the example, for I never saw them
sorrowful. If ever there was a word, it was the wife who said to her
husband, 'Crétu, you silly fellow, do be quiet, you make me laugh too
much.' Then he said to her, 'Hold your foolish tongue, Ramonette,'--I
don't know why he called her Ramonette,--'do be still, you really make
my sides ache, you are so funny.' And then I laughed to see them laugh,
and in this way I was brought up, and in this way they formed my
disposition; and I hope I have profited by it."

  [7] The French verb _rigoler_ is "to be merry."--E. T.

"Most assuredly you have, neighbour. So there never were any disputes
between them?"

"Never, oh, never! Sunday, Monday, and sometimes on Tuesday, they made
holiday, or kept wedding-day, as they called it, and always took me with
them. Papa Crétu was an excellent workman, and, when he chose to work,
he could earn what he pleased, and so could his wife, too. If they had
got enough to do for Sunday and Monday, and live on pretty comfortably,
they were perfectly satisfied. If, after this, they were on short
allowance for a time, they didn't mind it. I remember, when we had only
bread and water, Papa Crétu took from his library--"

"He had a library, then?"

"Oh, he used to call a little box so, in which he put his collection of
new songs; for he bought all the new ones, and knew them every one.
When, then, there was nothing but bread in the house, he used to take an
old cookery book from his library, and say to us, 'Well, now, let us
see, what shall we eat to-day? This, or that?' And then he used to read
out a long list of good things. Each of us chose a dish, and then Papa
Crétu took an empty saucepan, and, with the funniest airs and gestures
in the world, pretended to put into the saucepan all the ingredients
requisite for making a capital stew; and then he used to pretend to pour
it all out into a dish--also empty--which he placed on the table, with
still the same drolleries, which almost split our sides. Then he took up
his book again, and, whilst he was reading to us, for instance, the
recipe of a good fricassée of chicken, which we had chosen, and which
made our mouths water, we ate our bread, all laughing like so many mad
people."

"And, in this happy household, were there any debts to trouble them?"

"None whatever. So long as the money lasted, they ate, drank, and made
merry, and, when it was all gone, they lived upon 'make believe,' as
before."

"And did they never think of the future?"

"Oh, yes, they thought of it, of course; but what is the future to such
as we? Present and future are like Sunday and Monday; the one we spend
gaily and happily outside the barriers, the other is got over in the
faubourgs."

"And why, since this couple seemed so well assorted, did they never
marry?"

"A friend of theirs once put that very question in my presence."

"Well, and what did they say?"

"'Oh,' said they, 'if ever we have any children, it may be all very well
to marry, but as far as we are concerned, we do very well as we are. And
why should we make an obligation of that which we now perform willingly?
Besides, getting married costs money, and we have none to spare in
unnecessary expenses.' But, my goodness," added Rigolette, "how I am
running on. But, really, when once I begin to talk of these kind people,
who were so good to me, I never know when to leave off. Here,
neighbour, will you give me my shawl off the bed, and put it nicely over
my shoulders, then pin it underneath the collar of my habit-shirt with
this large pin, and then we will set off, for it will take us some time
to select the different things you wish to buy for the poor Morels."

Rodolph readily obeyed the directions of Rigolette. First he took from
the bed a large plaid shawl, which he placed with all imaginable care on
the well-formed shoulders of Rigolette.

"That will do, neighbour. Now, lift up my collar, and press the shawl
and dress together; then stick in the pin; but pray try not to prick me
with it."

The prince executed the orders given with zealous accuracy; then
observed, smilingly, to the grisette:

"Ah, Mlle. Rigolette, I should not like to be your _femme de chambre_;
there is danger in it!"

"Yes, I know," answered Rigolette gaily; "there is great danger for me
of having a pin run in by your awkwardness. But now," added she, after
they had left the room, and carefully locked the door after them, "take
my key; it is so large, I always expect it will burst my pocket; it is
as large as a pistol," and here the light-hearted girl laughed merrily
at her own conceit.

Rodolph accordingly "took charge" (that is the prescribed form of
speech) of an enormous key, which might well have figured in one of
those allegorical devices in which the vanquished are represented as
humbly offering the keys of their lost cities to the conquerors.
Although Rodolph believed himself too much changed by years to run any
risk of being recognised by Polidori, he still deemed it prudent to draw
up the collar of his paletot as he passed by the door of the apartments
belonging to the quack, Bradamanti.

"Neighbour," said Rigolette, "don't forget to tell M. Pipelet that you
are about to send in some things which are to be carried at once up to
your chamber."

"You are right, my good friend; let us step into the porter's lodge for
an instant."

M. Pipelet, with his everlasting bell-shaped hat on his head, dressed,
as usual, in the accustomed green coat, and seated before a table
covered with scraps of leather and fragments of boots and shoes, was
occupied in fixing a new sole on a boot, his whole look and manner
impressed with the same deeply meditative air which characterised his
usual proceedings. Anastasie was just then absent from the lodge.

"Well, M. Pipelet," said Rigolette, "I hope you will be pleased to hear
the good news. Thanks to my good neighbour here, the poor Morels have
got out of trouble. La! when one thinks of that poor man being taken off
to prison--oh, those bailiffs have no hearts!"

"Nor manners either, mademoiselle," rejoined M. Pipelet, in an angry
tone, wrathfully brandishing the boot then in progress of repair, and
into which he had inserted his left hand and arm. "No! I have no
hesitation in declaring, in the face of all mankind, that they are a set
of mannerless scoundrels. Why, taking advantage of the darkness of our
stairs, they actually carried their indecent violence so far as to lay
their audacious fingers upon the waist of my wife. When I first heard
the cries of her insulted modesty, I could not restrain myself, and,
spite of all efforts to restrain myself, I yielded to the natural
impetuosity of my disposition. Yes, I will frankly confess, my first
impulse was to remain perfectly motionless."

"But, I suppose, afterwards," said Rigolette, who had much ado to
preserve a serious air, "afterwards, M. Pipelet, you pursued them, and
bestowed the punishment they so well deserved?"

"I'll tell you, mademoiselle," answered Pipelet, deliberately; "when
these shameless ruffians passed before my lodge, my blood boiled, and I
could not prevent myself from hastily covering my face, that I might not
be shocked by the sight of these luxurious malefactors; but, afterwards,
I ceased to be astonished; for well I knew I might expect some sight or
sound to shock my senses; full well I was prepared for some direful
misfortune ere the day had passed, for I dreamed last night of Cabrion."

Rigolette smiled, while the heavy groans which broke from the oppressed
mind of the porter were mingled with blows of his hammer, as he
vigorously applied it to the sole of the boot he was mending.

"You wisely chose the wisest part, my dear M. Pipelet, that of despising
offences, and holding it beneath you to revenge them; but try to forget
these ill-conducted bailiffs, and oblige me by doing me a great favour."

"Man is born to help his fellow man," drawled out Pipelet, in a
melancholy and sententious tone; "and he is still further called upon so
to do when a good and worthy gentleman, moreover, a lodger in one's
house, is concerned."

"What I have to request of you is to carry up to my apartments for me
several things I am about to send in, and which are for the Morels."

"Make yourself easy upon that point, monsieur," replied Pipelet. "I will
faithfully perform your wishes."

"And afterwards," said Rodolph, mournfully, "you must obtain a priest to
watch by a little girl the Morels have lost in the night. Go and give
the requisite notification of the death, and bespeak a suitable
funeral."

"Make your mind easy, monsieur," replied Pipelet, more gravely even than
before; "directly my wife returns, I will go to the mayor, the church,
and the _traiteur's_: to the church, for the soul of the dead; to the
_traiteur's_, for the body of the living," added M. Pipelet,
philosophically and poetically. "Consider it done in both cases; my good
sir, consider it done."

At the entrance to the alley, Rodolph and Rigolette encountered
Anastasie returning from market with a huge basket of provisions.

"That's right! That's right!" cried the porteress, looking at the pair
with a knowing and significant air; "there you go, arm in arm already.
To be sure, look and love, love and look. Young people will be young
people, no doubt on't. Me and Alfred was just the same. Whoever heard of
a pretty girl without a beau? So, go along, my dears, and make
yourselves happy while you can." Then, after gazing after them some
minutes, the old woman disappeared in the depths of the alley, crying
out, "Alfred, my old darling! Don't worry yourself; 'Stasie's coming to
bring you something nice,--oh, so nice!"


END OF VOLUME II.


       *       *       *       *       *
Transcriber's Notes:

This e-text was prepared from numbered edition 505 of the 1000 printed.

Minor punctuation and capitalization corrections have been made without
comment.

Minor typographical errors of single words, otherwise spelled correctly
throughout the text have been made without comment.

Word Variations appearing in the original text which have been retained:

"box-wood" and "boxwood"
"court-yard" and "courtyard"
"dairy-maid" and "dairymaid"
"incumber" and "encumber"
"milk-woman" and "milkwoman"
"out-building" and "outbuilding"
"Saint-Remy" (16) and "Saint-Rémy" (6)
"stew-pan" and "stewpan"

Words using the [oe] ligature, which have been herein represented as
"oe": manoeuvre, <i>et coeteras</i>, <i>chef-d'oeuvre</i>

Throughout the text, illustrations and their captions were placed on
facing pages. For the purpose of this e-text these pages have been
combined into one entry.

Footnotes, originally at the bottom of a printed page, have been placed
directly below the paragraph in which their anchor symbol appears.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Mysteries of Paris, Volume 2 of 6, by 
Eugène Sue

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MYSTERIES OF PARIS, V.2 ***

***** This file should be named 33801-8.txt or 33801-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/3/8/0/33801/

Produced by David Edwards, Christine Aldridge and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
(Stanford University, SUL Books in the Public Domain)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


Project Gutenberg's The Mysteries of Paris, Volume 3 of 6, by Eugène Sue

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Mysteries of Paris, Volume 3 of 6

Author: Eugène Sue

Illustrators: G. Mercier
              Bicknell
              Léon Poiteau
              Adrian Marcel

Release Date: September 22, 2010 [EBook #33802]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MYSTERIES OF PARIS, V.3 ***




Produced by David Edwards, Christine Aldridge and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
(Stanford University, SUL Books in the Public Domain)





Transcriber's Notes:

1. Passages in italics are surrounded by _underscores_.

2. Passages in Gothic Bold are surrounded by +plus+ signs.

3. Other transcription notes appear at the end of this e-text.




[Illustration: _Took my head between his hands._
Original Etching by Mercier.]




+The Mysteries of Paris.+


  _ILLUSTRATED WITH ETCHINGS
  BY MERCIER, BICKNELL, POITEAU,
  AND ADRIAN MARCEL._

                 _BY EUGENE SUE_


      _IN SIX VOLUMES_
        _VOLUME III._


        _PRINTED FOR
   FRANCIS A. NICCOLLS & CO.
           BOSTON_


      +Edition de Luxe+

_This edition is limited to one thousand copies,
of which this is_

          No.______




CONTENTS.


      CHAPTER                                             PAGE
         I. THE TEMPLE                                      11
        II. THE ARREST                                      52
       III. JACQUES FERRAND                                108
        IV. THE OFFICE                                     116
         V. THE CLIENTS                                    137
        VI. THE ANONYMOUS LETTER                           167
       VII. REFLECTIONS                                    197
      VIII. THE BACHELORS' BREAKFAST                       211
        IX. ST. LAZARE                                     225
         X. MONT SAINT-JEAN                                240
        XI. LA LOUVE AND LA GOUALEUSE                      255
       XII. THE PROTECTRESS                                285
      XIII. THE FORCED FRIENDSHIP                          300
       XIV. CECILY                                         313




ILLUSTRATIONS.

                                                          PAGE
      TOOK MY HEAD BETWEEN HIS HANDS             _Frontispiece_
      DREW CAREFULLY OUT A SHEET OF PAPER                   35
      MOREL FELL BACK ON THE STOOL                          83
      HE WILL SCOLD YOU AWFULLY                            134
      M. D'HARVILLE HAD BLOWN HIS BRAINS OUT               222
      LA GOUALEUSE IN THE PRISON                           279




THE MYSTERIES OF PARIS.




CHAPTER I.

THE TEMPLE.


To the deep snow which had fallen during the past night had succeeded a
very sharp wind, so that the ordinarily muddy pavement was hard and dry,
as Rigolette and Rodolph wended onwards to the immense and singular
bazar called the Temple, the young girl leaning unceremoniously on the
arm of her cavalier, who, on his part, appeared as much at his ease as
though they had been old familiar friends.

"What a funny old woman Madame Pipelet is!" observed the grisette to her
companion; "and what very odd things she says!"

"Well, I thought her remarks very striking, as well as appropriate."

"Which of them, neighbour?"

"Why, when she said 'Young people would be young people,' and '_Vive
l'amour!_'"

"Well?"

"Well! I only mean to say those are precisely my sentiments."

"Your sentiments?"

"Yes, I should like nothing better than to pass my youth with you,
taking '_Vive l'amour!_' for my motto."

"I dare say, for certainly you are not hard to please."

"Why, where would be the harm,--are we not near neighbours? Of course we
are, or else I should not be seen walking out with you in this manner in
broad day."

"Then you allow me to hope--"

"Hope what?"

"That you will learn to love me."

"Oh, bless you, I do love you already!"

"Really?"

"To be sure I do. Why, how can I help it? You are good and gay; though
poor yourself, you have done all in your power by interesting rich
people in the fate of the Morels; your appearance pleases me; and you
have altogether a nice look, and a sort of air such as one is glad to
find in a person we expect to go about with a great deal. So there, I
think, are abundant reasons for my loving you."

Then, suddenly breaking into loud fits of laughter, Rigolette abruptly
exclaimed, "Look there, only look at that fat woman with the furred
shoes! What does she remind you of? I'll tell you,--of a great sack
being drawn along by two cats without tails!" and again she laughed
merrily.

"I would rather look at you, my pretty neighbour, than at all the fat
old women or tailless cats in Europe. I am so delighted to find you
already love me."

"I only tell you the truth; if I disliked you, I should speak just as
plainly. I cannot reproach myself with ever having deceived or flattered
any one; but, if a person pleases me, I tell them so directly."

Again interrupting the thread of her discourse, the grisette drew up
suddenly before the windows of a shop, saying, "Oh, do pray only look at
that pretty clock and those two handsome vases! I had already saved up
three francs and a half, and had put it in my money-box, to buy such a
set as that. In five or six years I might have been able to buy them."

"Saved up, do you say? Then, I suppose, you earn--"

"At least thirty sous a day,--sometimes forty; but I never reckon upon
more than thirty, which is the more prudent; and I regulate all my
expenses accordingly," said Rigolette, with an air as important as
though she was settling the financial budget.

"But with thirty sous a day, how do you manage to live?"

"Oh, bless you! that is easily reckoned. Shall I tell you how I manage,
neighbour? I fancy you are rather extravagant in your notions; so,
perhaps, it may serve as a lesson for you."

"Yes, pray do."

"Well, then, thirty sous a day make five and forty francs a month, do
they not?"

"Yes."

"Well, then, out of that I pay twelve francs for lodging; that leaves me
twenty-three francs for food, etc."

"Is it possible? Twenty-three francs for one month's food!"

"Yes, really, all that! Certainly, for such a person as myself, it does
seem an enormous sum; but then, you see, I deny myself nothing."

"Oh, you little glutton!"

"Ah! but then, remember, I include the food for both my birds in that
sum."

"Certainly it seems less exorbitant, when you come to reckon, for three
than for one; but just tell me how you manage day by day, that I may
profit by your good example."

"Well, then, be attentive, and I will go over the different things I
spend in it. First of all, one pound of bread, that costs four sous;
then two sous' worth of milk make six; four sous' worth of vegetables in
winter, or fruit and salad in summer,--I am very found of salad,
because, like vegetables, it is such a nice clean thing to prepare, and
does not soil the hands; there goes ten sous at once; then three sous
for butter, or oil and vinegar, to season the salad with, that makes
thirteen sous; a pail of nice fresh water,--oh, I must have that! it is
my principal extravagance,--that brings it to fifteen sous, don't you
see? Then add two or three sous a week for chickweed and seed for my
birds, who generally have part of my bread and milk; all this comes to
exactly twenty-three francs a month, neither more nor less."

"And do you never eat meat?"

"Meat, indeed! I should think not. Why, it costs from ten to twelve sous
a pound! A likely thing for me to buy! Besides, there is all the
nuisance and smell of cooking; instead of which, milk, vegetables, or
fruit, are always ready when you wish for them. I tell you what is a
favourite dish of mine, without being troublesome to prepare, and which
I excel in making."

"Oh, pray let me know what it is?"

"Why, I get some beautiful ripe, rosy apples, and put them at the top of
my little stove; when they are quite tender, I bruise them with a little
milk, and just a taste of sugar. It is a dish for an emperor. If you
behave well, I will let you taste it some day."

"Prepared by your hands, it can scarcely fail being excellent; but let
us keep to our reckoning. Let me see, we counted twenty-three francs for
living, etc., and twelve francs for lodging; that makes thirty-five
francs a month."

"Well, then, out of the forty-five or fifty francs I earn, there remains
from ten to fifteen francs a month for my wood and oil during the
winter, as well as for my clothes and washing; that is to say, for soap
and other requisites; because, excepting my sheets, I wash my own
things; that is another of my extravagances,--a good laundress would
pretty well ruin me; while, as I am a very quick and good ironer, the
expense is principally that of my own time. During the five winter
months I burn a load and a half of wood, while I consume about four or
five sous' worth of oil for my lamp daily; that makes it cost me about
eighty francs a year for fire and lights."

"So that you have, in fact, scarcely one hundred francs to clothe
yourself, and find you in pocket money."

"No more; yet out of that sum I managed to save my three francs and a
half."

"But your gowns, your shoes,--this smart little cap?"

"As for caps, I never wear one but when I go out, so that is not
ruinous; and, at home, I go bareheaded. As for my gowns and boots, have
I not got the Temple to go to for them?"

"Ah, yes, this convenient, handy Temple! So you buy there?"

"All sorts of pretty and excellent dresses. Why, only imagine, great
ladies are accustomed to give their old, cast-off gowns, etc., to their
maids. When I say old, I mean that, perhaps, they have worn them for a
month or two, just to ride out in the carriage. Well, and then the
ladies' maids sell them to the persons who have shops at the Temple for
almost nothing. Just look at the nice dark merino dress I have on; well,
I only gave fourteen francs for it, when, I make no doubt, it cost at
least sixty, and had scarcely been put on. I altered it to fit myself;
and I flatter myself it does me credit."

"Indeed, it does, and very great credit, too. Yes, I begin to see now,
thanks to the Temple, you really may contrive to make a hundred francs a
year suffice for your dress."

"To be sure; why, I can buy in the summer sweet pretty gowns for five or
six francs; boots, like these I have on, and almost new, for two or
three francs a pair; just look at my boots. Now, would not any one say
they had been made for me?" said Rigolette, suddenly stopping, and
holding up one of her pretty little feet, really very nicely set off by
the well-fitting boot she wore.

"It is, indeed, a charming foot; but you must have some difficulty in
getting fitted. However, I suppose, at the Temple, they keep shoes and
boots of all sizes, from a woman's to a child's."

"Ah, neighbour, I begin to find out what a terrible flatterer you are.
However, after what I have told you, you must see now that a young girl,
who is careful, and has only herself to keep, may manage to live
respectably on thirty sous a day; to be sure, the four hundred and fifty
francs I brought out of prison with me helped me on famously, for when
people saw that I had my own furniture in my apartments, they felt more
confidence in entrusting me with work to take home. I was some time,
though, before I met with employment. Fortunately for me, I had kept by
me as much money as enabled me to live three months without earning
anything."

"Shall I own to you that, under so gay and giddy a manner, I scarcely
expected to hear so much sound sense as that uttered by your pretty
mouth, my good neighbour?"

"Ah! but let me tell you that, when one is all alone in the world, and
has no wish to be under any obligation, it is quite necessary, as the
proverb says, to mind how we build our nest, to take care of it when it
is built."

"And certainly yours is as charming a nest as the most fastidious bird
could desire."

"Yes, isn't it? for, as I say, I never refuse myself anything. Now, I
consider my chamber as above my means; in fact, too handsome for one
like me; then I have two birds; always, at least, two pots of flowers on
my mantelpiece, without reckoning those on the window-ledges; and yet,
as I told you, I had actually got three francs and a half in my
money-box, towards the ornaments I hoped some day to be able to buy for
my mantelpiece."

"And what became of this store?"

"Oh, why, lately, when I saw the poor Morels so very, very wretched, I
said to myself, 'What is the use of hoarding up these stupid pieces of
money, and letting them lie idle in a money-box, when good and honest
people are actually starving for want of them?' So I took out the three
francs, and lent them to Morel. When I say lent, I mean I told him I
only lent them, to spare his feelings; but, of course, I never meant to
have them back again."

"Yes, but my dear neighbour, you cannot refuse to let them repay you,
now they are so differently situated."

"Why, no; I think if Morel were to offer them to me now, I should not
refuse them; it will, at any rate, enable me to begin my store for
buying the chimney ornaments I do so long to possess. You would scarcely
believe how silly I am; but I almost dream of a beautiful clock, such a
one as I showed you just now, and two lovely vases, one on each side."

"But, then, you should think a little of the future."

"What future?"

"Suppose you were to be ill, for instance."

"Me ill? Oh, the idea!" And the fresh, hearty laugh of Rigolette
resounded through the street.

"Well, why should you not be?"

"Do I look like a person likely to be sick?"

"Certainly I never saw a more bright or blooming countenance."

"Well, then, what could possibly have put it into your head to talk such
nonsense as to suppose I could ever be ill?"

"Nay, but--"

"Why, I am only eighteen years of age, and, considering the sort of life
I lead, there is no chance of such a thing. I rise at five o'clock,
winter or summer; I am never up after ten, or, at latest, eleven; I eat
sufficient to satisfy my appetite, which certainly is not a very great
one; I do not suffer from exposure to cold; I work all day, singing as
merrily as a lark; and at night I sleep like a dormouse. My heart is
free, light, and happy. My employers are so well satisfied with what I
do for them, that I am quite sure not to want for work; so what is there
for me to be ill about? It really is too amusing to hear you try to talk
sense, and only utter nonsense! Me ill!" And, at the very absurdity of
the idea, Rigolette again burst into an immoderate fit of laughter, so
loud and prolonged that a stout gentleman who was walking before her,
carrying a dog under his arm, turned around quite angrily, believing all
this mirth was excited by his presence.

Resuming her composure, Rigolette slightly curtseyed to the stout
individual, and pointing to the animal under his arm, said:

"Is your dog so very tired, sir?"

The fat man grumbled out some indistinct reply, and continued on his
way.

"My dear neighbour," said Rodolph, "are you losing your senses?"

"It is your fault if I am."

"How so?"

"Because you talk such nonsense to me."

"Do you call my saying that perhaps you might be ill, talking
foolishly?"

And, once more overcome by the irresistible mirth awakened by the
absurdity of Rodolph's suggestion, Rigolette again relapsed into long
and hearty fits of laughter; while Rodolph, deeply struck by this blind,
yet happy reliance upon the future, felt angry with himself for having
tried to shake it, though he almost shuddered as he pictured to himself
the havoc a single month's illness would make in this peaceful mode of
life. Then the implicit reliance entertained by Rigolette on the
stability of her employ, and her youthful courage, her sole treasures,
struck Rodolph as breathing the very essence of pure and contented
innocence; for the confidence expressed by the young dressmaker arose
neither from recklessness nor improvidence, but from an instinctive
dependence and belief in that divine justice which would never forsake a
virtuous and industrious creature,--a simple girl, whose greatest crime
was in relying too confidently on the blessed gifts of youth and health,
the precious boon of a heavenly benefactor. Do the birds of the air
remember, as they flit on gay and agile wing amidst the blue skies of
summer, or skim lightly over the sweet-smelling fields of blooming
lucerne, that bleak, cold winter must follow so much enjoyment?

"Then," said Rodolph to the grisette, "it seems you have no wish for
anything more than you already possess?"

"No, really I have not."

"Positively, nothing you desire?"

"No, I tell you. Stay, yes, now I recollect, there are those sweet
pretty chimney ornaments; but I shall be sure to have them some of these
days, though I do not know exactly when; but still, they do so run in my
head, that, sooner than be disappointed, I will sit up all night to
work."

"And besides these ornaments?"

"Oh, nothing more; no, I cannot recollect any one other thing I care for
more especially now."

"Why now, particularly?"

"Because, yesterday, if you had asked me the same question, I should
have replied, there was nothing I wanted more than an agreeable
neighbour in your apartments, to give me an opportunity of showing all
the little acts of kindness I have been accustomed to perform, and to
receive nice little attentions in return."

"Well, but you know, my dear neighbour, we have already entered into an
agreement to be mutually serviceable to each other; you will look after
my linen for me, and I shall clean up and polish your chamber for you;
and besides attending to my linen, you are to wake me every morning
early by tapping against the wainscot."

"And do you think you have named all I shall expect you to do?"

"What else can I do?"

"Oh, bless you, you have not yet come to the end of your services! Why,
do you not intend to take me out every Sunday, either to the Boulevards
or beyond the barriers? You know that is the only day I can enjoy a
little pleasure."

"To be sure I do; and when summer comes we will go into the country."

"No, no, I hate the country! I cannot bear to be anywhere but in Paris.
Yet I used, once upon a time, to go, out of good nature, with a young
friend of mine, who was with me in prison, to visit Meudon and St.
Germain. My friend was a very nice, good girl, and because she had such
a sweet voice, and was always singing, people used to call her the
Goualeuse."

"And what has become of her?"

"I don't know. She spent all the money she brought with her out of
prison, without seeming to have much pleasure for it; she was inclined
to be mournful and serious, though kind and sympathising to every one.
At the time we used to go out together I had not met with any work to
do, but directly I procured employment, I never allowed myself a
holiday. I gave her my address, but, as she never came to see me, I
suppose she, like myself, was too busy to spare the time. But I dare say
you don't care to hear any more about her; I only mentioned it because I
wanted to show you that it is no use asking me to go into the country
with you, for I never did, and never will go there, except with the
young friend I was telling you about; but whenever you can afford to
take me out to dinner or to the play, I shall be quite ready to
accompany you, and when it does not suit you to spend the money, or when
you have none to spend, why then we will take a walk, and have a good
look at the shops, which is almost the nicest thing I know, unless it is
buying at them. And I promise you, you shall have no reason to feel
ashamed of my appearance, let us go out among ever such company. Oh,
when I wear my dark blue levantine silk gown, I flatter myself I _do_
look like somebody! It is such a love of a dress, and fits me so
beautifully! I never wear it but on Sundays, and then I put on such a
love of a lace cap, trimmed with shaded orange-colour riband, which
looks so well with dark hair like mine; then I have some such elegant
boots of satin hue, made for me, not bought at the Temple! And last of
all comes such a shawl! Oh, neighbour, I doubt if you ever walked with
any one in such perfect beauty; it is a real _bourre-de-soie_, in
imitation of cashmere. I quite expect we shall be stared at and admired
by every one as we go along; the men will look back as they pass me, and
say, 'Upon my word that's an uncommon pretty-looking girl,--she is, 'pon
honour!' Then the women will cry, 'What a stylish-looking man! Do you
see that tall, thin person? I declare, he has such a fashionable
appearance that he might pass as somebody if he liked; what a becoming
and handsome moustachio he has!' And between ourselves, neighbour, I
quite agree with these remarks, and especially about the moustachio, for
I dearly love to see a man wear them. Unfortunately M. Germain did not
wear a moustachio, on account of the situation he held; I believe his
employer did not permit his young men to wear them. To be sure, M.
Cabrion did wear moustachios, but then, his were quite red, like his
great bushy beard, and I hate those huge beards; and besides, I did not
like Cabrion for two other reasons; one was, he used to play all kinds
of scampish tricks out in the street, and the other thing I disliked
was his tormenting poor old Pipelet as he did. Certainly, M. Giraudeau,
the person who lived next to me before M. Cabrion, was rather a
smart-looking man, and dressed very well; but then he squinted, and at
first that used to put me out very much, because he always seemed to be
looking past me at some one by my side, and I always found myself,
without thinking of it, turning around to see who it could be."

And here Rigolette indulged in another peal of merry laughter.

As Rodolph listened to all this childish and voluble talk, he felt
almost at a loss how to estimate the pretensions of the grisette to be
considered of first-rate prudence and virtue; sometimes the very absence
of all reserve in her communications, and the recollection of the great
bolt on her door, made him conclude that she bore a general and platonic
affection only for every occupant of the chamber adjoining her own, and
that her interest in them was nothing more than that of a sister; but
again he smiled at the credulity which could believe such a thing
possible, when the unprotected condition of the young dressmaker, and
the fascinations of Messrs. Giraudeau, Cabrion, and Germain were taken
into account. Still, the frankness and originality of Rigolette made him
pause in the midst of his doubts, and refuse to allow him to judge
harshly of the ingenuous and light-hearted being who tripped beside him.

"I am delighted at the way you have disposed of my Sundays," said
Rodolph, gaily. "I see plainly we shall have some capital treats."

"Stop a little, Mr. Extravagance, and let me tell you how I mean to
regulate our expenses; in the summer we can dine beautifully, either at
the Chartreuse or the Montmartre hermitage, for three francs, then half
a dozen quadrilles or waltzes, and a ride upon the wooden horses,--oh, I
do so love riding on horseback!--well, that will bring it altogether to
about five francs, not a farthing more, I assure you. Do you waltz?"

"Yes, very well."

"I am glad of that. M. Cabrion always trod on my toes, so that he quite
put me out; and then, too, by way of a joke, he used to throw
fulminating balls about on the ground; so at last the people at the
Chartreuse would not allow us to be admitted there."

"Oh, I promise you to be very well behaved whenever we are met together;
and as for the fulminating balls, I promise you never to have anything
to do with them; but when winter comes, how shall we manage then?"

"Why, in the winter we shall be able to dine very comfortably for forty
sous. I think people never care so much for eating in the winter as
summer; so then we shall have three francs left to pay for our going to
the play, for I shall not allow you to exceed a hundred sous for the
whole of our expenses, and that is a great deal of money to spend in
pleasure; but then, if you were out alone, it would cost you much more
at the tavern or billiard-rooms, where you would only meet a parcel of
low, ignorant men, smelling of tobacco enough to choke you. Is it not
much better for you to pass a pleasant day with a nice little, cheerful,
good-tempered companion, who, in return for the holiday you so agreeably
pass with her, will contrive to make up the extra expense she costs you
by hemming your handkerchiefs, and looking after your domestic affairs?"

"Nothing can be more advantageous, as far as I am concerned; but suppose
any of my friends should meet me walking with my pretty neighbour, what
then?"

"What then! Why, they would just look at you, and then at me; and then
they would smile and say, 'That's a lucky fellow, that Rodolph!'"

"You know my name, do you?"

"Why, of course, when I heard that the chamber adjoining mine was let,
I inquired the name of the person who had taken it."

"Yes, I dare say every one who met us out together would remark, as you
observe, what a lucky fellow I was; then the next thing would be to envy
me."

"So much the better."

"They would believe I was perfectly happy."

"Of course, of course they would."

"All the while I should only be so in appearance."

"Well, what does that signify? As long as people think you happy, what
does it matter whether you are really so or not? Men neither require nor
care for more than outward show."

"But your reputation might suffer."

Rigolette burst into an uncontrollable fit of laughter.

"The reputation of a grisette!" said she. "Do you suppose that any
person believes in such a phenomenon? Ah, if I had either father,
mother, brother, or sister, for their sakes I should fear what people
might say of me, and be anxious about the world's opinion; but I am
alone in the world, and have no person to consider but myself, so, while
I know myself to be free from blame or reproach, I care not for what any
one may say of me, or think either."

"But still I should be very unhappy."

"What for?"

"To pass for being a happy as well as a lucky fellow, when, after the
fashion of Papa Crétu's dinner, I should be expected to make a meal off
a dry crust, while all the tempting dishes contained in a cookery-book
were being read to me."

"Oh, nonsense! you will be quite contented to live as I describe. You
will find me so grateful for every little act of kindness, so easily
pleased, and so little troublesome, that I know you will say, 'Why,
after all, I may as well spend my Sunday with her as with any one else.'
If you have any time in the evening, and have no objection to come and
sit with me, you can have the use of my fire and light. If it would not
tire you to read aloud, you would amuse me by reading some nice novel or
romance. Better do that than lose your money at cards or billiards;
otherwise, if you are occupied at your office, or prefer going to a
café, you can just bid me good night when you come in, if I happen still
to be up; but should I have gone to bed, why then I will wish you good
morning at an early hour next day, by tapping against your wainscot to
awaken you. Why, M. Germain, my last fellow lodger, used to pass all his
evenings with me in that manner, and never complained of their being
dull. He read me all Walter Scott's novels in the course of the winter,
which was really very amusing. Sometimes, when it chanced to be a wet
Sunday, he would go and buy something at the pastry-cook's, and we used
to have a nice little dinner in my room; and afterwards we amused
ourselves with reading; and we liked that almost as well as going to the
theatre. You see by this that I am not hard to please, but, on the
contrary, am always ready to do what I can to make things pleasant and
agreeable. And then you were talking about illness. Oh, if ever you
should be ill, then, indeed, I should be a comfort to you, a real Sister
of Charity! Only ask the Morels what sort of a nurse I am. You don't
half know your own good fortune, M. Rodolph; you have drawn a real prize
in the lottery of good luck to have me for a neighbour, I can assure
you."

"I quite agree with you; but I always was lucky. Apropos of your late
fellow lodger, M. Germain, where is he at present?"

"In Paris, I believe."

"Then you do not see much of him now?"

"No, he has never been to see me since he quitted the house."

"But where is he living? And what is he doing at present?"

"Why do you want to know?"

"Because," said Rodolph, smiling, "I am jealous of him, and I wish--"

"Jealous!" exclaimed Rigolette, bursting into a fit of laughter. "La,
bless you, there is no occasion for that, poor fellow!"

"But, seriously, my good neighbour, I wish most particularly to obtain
M. Germain's address, or to be enabled to meet him. You know where he
lives; and without any boast, I think I have good reason to expect you
would trust me with the secret of his residence, and to believe me quite
incapable of revealing again the information I ask of you, assuring you
most solemnly it is for his own interest more than mine I am solicitous
of finding him."

"And seriously, my good neighbour, although it is probable and possible
your intentions towards M. Germain are as you report them, I am not at
liberty to give you the address of M. Germain, he having strictly and
expressly forbidden my so doing to any person whatever; therefore, when
I refuse to tell _you_, you may be quite sure it is because I really am
not at liberty to do so; and that ought not to make you feel offended
with me. If you had entrusted me with a secret, you would be pleased,
would you not, to have me as careful of it, and determined not to reveal
it, as I am about M. Germain's affair?"

"Nay, but--"

"Neighbour, once and for all, do not say anything more on this subject.
I have made a promise which I will keep faithfully and honourably; so
now you know my mind, and if you ask me a hundred times, I shall answer
you just the same."

Spite of her thoughtlessness and frivolity, the young dressmaker
pronounced these last words with so much firmness that, to his great
regret, Rodolph perceived the impossibility of gaining the desired
information respecting Germain through her means; and his mind revolted
at the idea of laying any snare to entrap her into a betrayal of her
secret; he therefore, after a slight pause, gaily replied:

"Well, let us say no more about it, then; but, upon my life, I don't
wonder at you, who can so well keep the secrets of others, guarding your
own so closely."

"Me have secrets?" cried Rigolette. "I only wish I had some more secrets
of my own; it must be very amusing to have secrets."

"Do you really mean to assert that you have not a 'nice little secret'
about some love-affair?"

"Love-affair!"

"Are you going to persuade me you have never been in love?" said
Rodolph, looking fixedly at Rigolette, the better to read the truth in
her telltale features.

"Been in love? Why, of course I have, with M. Giraudeau, M. Cabrion, M.
Germain, and you!"

"Are you sure you loved them just as you do me, neither more nor less?"

"Oh, really, I cannot tell you so very exactly! If anything, I should
say less; because I had to become accustomed to the squinting eyes of M.
Giraudeau, the disagreeable jokes and red beard of M. Cabrion, and the
low spirits and constant dejection of M. Germain, for the poor young man
was very sad, and always seemed to have a heavy load on his mind, while
you, on the contrary, took my fancy directly I saw you."

"Come now, my pretty neighbour, you must not be angry with me; I am
going to speak candidly and sincerely, like an old friend."

"Oh, don't be afraid to say anything to me; I am very good-natured; and
besides, I feel certain you are too kind; you could never have the heart
to say anything to me that would give me pain."

"You are quite right; but do tell me truly, have you never had any
lovers?"

"Lovers! I should think not! What time have I for such things?"

"What has time got to do with it?"

"Why, everything, to be sure. In the first place, I should be jealous as
a tigress; and I should be continually worrying myself with one idea or
another; and let me ask you whether you think it is likely I could
afford to lose two or three hours a day in fretting and grieving. And
then, suppose my lover were to turn out false! Oh, what tears it would
cost me; how wretched I should be! All that sort of thing would put me
sadly behindhand with my work, I can tell you."

"Well, but all lovers are not faithless and a cause of grief and sorrow
to their mistress."

"Oh, bless you! It would be still worse for me, if he were all goodness
and truth. Why, then I should not be able to live without him for a
single hour; and as most probably he would be obliged to remain all day
in his office, or shop, or manufactory, I should be like some poor,
restless spirit all the time of his absence. I should imagine all sorts
of things, picture to myself his being at that moment pleasantly engaged
in company with one he loved better than myself. And then, if he forsook
me, oh, Heaven only knows what I might be tempted to do in my despair,
or what might become of me. One thing is very certain, that my work
would suffer for it; and then what should I do? Why, quietly as I live
at present, it is much as I can manage to live by working from twelve to
fifteen hours a day. Where should I be, if I were to lose three or four
days a week by tormenting myself? How could I ever catch up all that
time? Oh, I never could; it would be quite impossible! I should be
obliged, then, to take a situation, to live under the control of a
mistress; but no, no, I will never bring myself to that,--I love my
liberty too well."

"Your liberty?"

"Yes, I might go as forewoman to the person who keeps the warehouse for
which I work; she would give me four hundred francs a year, with board
and lodging."

"And you will not accept it?"

"No, indeed! I should then be the slave and servant of another; whereas,
however humble my home, at least there is no one there to control me. I
am free to come and go as I please. I owe nothing to any one. I have
good health, good courage, good heart, and good spirits; and now that I
can say a good neighbour also, what is there left to desire?"

"Then you have never thought of marriage?"

"Marriage, indeed! Why, what would be the use of my thinking about it,
when, poor as I am, I could not expect to meet with a husband better off
than myself? Look at the poor Morels; just see the consequences of
burthening yourself with a family before you have the means of providing
for one; whilst, so long as there is only oneself to provide for, one
can always manage somehow."

"And do you never build castles in the air?--never dream?"

"Dream? Oh, yes!--of my chimney ornaments; but, besides them, what can I
have to wish for?"

"But, suppose now some relation you never heard of in your life were to
die, and leave you a nice little fortune--twelve hundred francs a year,
for instance--you have made five hundred sufficient to supply all your
wants?"

"Perhaps it might prove a good thing; perhaps a bad one."

"How could it be a bad one?"

"Because I am happy and contented as I am; but I do not know what I
might be if I came to be rich. I can assure you that, when, after a hard
day's work, I go to bed in my own snug little room, when my lamp is
extinguished, and by the glimmer of the few cinders left in my stove I
see my neat, clean little apartment, my curtains, my chest of drawers,
my chairs, my birds, my watch, my table covered with the work confided
to me, left all ready to begin the first thing in the morning, and I say
to myself, all this is mine,--I have no one to thank for it but
myself,--oh, neighbour, the very thoughts lull me into such a happy
state of mind that I fall asleep believing myself the most fortunate
creature on earth to be so surrounded with comforts. But, I declare,
here we are at the Temple! You must own it is a beautiful object?"

Although not partaking of the profound admiration expressed by Rigolette
at the first glimpse of the Temple, Rodolph was, nevertheless, much
struck by the singular appearance of this enormous bazar with its many
diverging passages and dependencies. Towards the middle of the Rue du
Temple, not far from the fountain which stands in the corner of a large
square, may be seen an immense parallelogram, built of wood, and
surmounted with a slated roof. This building is the Temple, bounded on
the left by the Rue du Petit Thouars, and on the right by the Rue
Percée; it leads to a large circular building,--a colossal rotunda,
surrounded with a gallery, forming a sort of arcade. A long opening,
intersecting this parallelogram in its length and breadth, divides it
into two equal parts, which are again divided and subdivided into an
infinity of small lateral and transverse openings, crossing each other
in all directions, and sheltered by the roof of the building from all
severity of weather. In this bazar new merchandise is generally
prohibited; but the smallest fragment of any sort of material, the
merest morsel of iron, brass, lead, or pewter, will here find both a
buyer and a seller.

Here are to be found dealers in pieces of every coloured cloth, of all
ages, qualities, shades, and capabilities, for the service of such as
wish to repair or alter damaged or ill-fitting garments. Some of the
shops present huge piles of old shoes, some trodden down of heel,
others twisted, torn, worn, split, and in holes, presenting a mass of
nameless, formless, colourless objects, among which are grimly visible
some species of fossil soles about an inch thick, studded with thick
nails, resembling the door of a prison and hard as a horse's hoof, the
actual skeletons of shoes whose other component parts have long since
been consumed by the devouring hand of Time. Yet all this mouldy, dried
up accumulation of decaying rubbish will find a willing purchaser, an
extensive body of merchants trading in this particular line.

Then there are the vendors of gimps, fringes, bindings, cords, tassels,
and edgings of silk, cotton, or thread, arising out of the demolition of
curtains past all cure and defying all reparation. Other enterprising
individuals devote themselves to the sale of females' hats and bonnets,
these articles only reaching their emporium by the means of the dealers
in old clothes, and after having performed the strangest journeys and
undergone the most surprising transformations, the most singular changes
of colour.

In order that the article traded in may not take up too much room in a
warehouse ordinarily the size of a large box, these bonnets are
carefully folded in half, then flattened and laid upon each other as
closely as they can be packed, with the exception of the brim. They are
treated in every respect the same as herrings, requiring to be stowed in
a cask. By these means it is almost incredible what a quantity of these
usually fragile articles may be accommodated in a small space of about
four feet square.

Should a purchaser present himself, the various specimens are removed
from the high pressure to which they have been exposed, the vendor, with
a _dégagé_ air, gives the crown a dexterous blow with his fist, which
makes the centre rise to its accustomed situation, then presses the
front out upon his knee, concluding by holding up, with an air of
intense satisfaction at his own ingenuity, an object so wild, so
whimsical, and withal so irresistibly striking, as to remind one of
those traditional costumes ascribed for ages past to fishwomen,
apple-women, or any whose avocation involves the necessity of carrying a
basket on the head.

Farther on, at the sign of the Goût du Jour, beneath the arcades of the
Rotunda, elevated at the end of the large opening which intersects the
Temple and divides it into two parts, are suspended myriads of vestments
of all colours, forms, and fashions, even more various and extraordinary
in their respective styles than the bonnets just described. There may be
seen stylish coats of unbleached linen, adorned with three rows of brass
buttons _à la hussarde_, and sprucely ornamented with a small fur collar
of fox-skin; great-coats, originally bottle-green, but changed, by age
and service, to the hue of the pistachio nut, edged with black braid,
and set off with a bright flaming lining of blue and yellow plaid,
giving quite a fresh and youthful appearance, and producing the most
genteel and tasty effect; coats that, when new, bore the appellation, as
regards their cut, of being _à queue de Morue_, of a dark drab colour,
with velvet, shag, or plush collar, and further decorated with buttons,
once silver-gilt, but now changed to a dull coppery hue. In the same
emporium may be observed sundry pelisses or polonaises of
maroon-coloured cloth, with cat-skin collar, trimmed with braiding, and
rich in brandenburgs, tassels, and cords. Not far from these are
displayed a great choice of dressing-gowns most artistically constructed
out of old cloaks, whose triple collars and capes have been removed, the
inside lined with remnants of printed cotton, the most in request being
blue or dark green, made up here and there with pieces of various
distinct shades, and embroidered with old braid, and lined with red
cotton, on which is traced a flowing design in vivid orange, collar and
cuffs similarly adorned; a cord for the waist, made out of an old
bell-rope, serves as a finish to these elegant _déshabillés_ so
exultingly worn by Robert Macaire. We shall briefly pass over a mass of
costumes more or less uncouth, in the midst of which may be found some
real and authentic relics of royalty or greatness, dragged by the
revolution of time from the palaces of the rich and mighty to the dingy
shelves of the Rotunda of the Temple.

These displays of old shoes, hats, and coats are the grotesque parts of
the bazar,--the place where rags and faded finery seek to set up their
claim to notice. But it must be allowed, or rather distinctly asserted,
that the vast establishment we are describing is of immense utility to
the poor or persons in mediocre circumstances. There they may purchase,
at an amazing decrease of price, most excellent articles, nearly new,
and whose wear has been little or none. One side of the Temple was
devoted to articles of bedding, and contained piles of blankets, sheets,
mattresses, and pillows. Farther on were carpets, curtains, every
description of useful household utensil. Close at hand were stores of
wearing apparel, shoes, stockings, caps, and bonnets, for all ages, as
well as all classes and conditions.

All these articles were scrupulously clean and devoid of anything that
could offend or shock the most fastidious person. Those who have never
visited this bazar will scarcely credit in how short a space of time,
and with how little money, a cart may be filled with every requisite for
the complete fitting out of two or three utterly destitute families.

Rodolph was particularly struck with the manner, at once attentive,
eager, and cheerful, of the various dealers, as, standing at the door of
their shops, they solicited the patronage and custom of the passers-by.
Their mode of address, at once familiar and respectful, seemed
altogether unlike the tone of the present day. Scarcely had Rigolette
and her companion entered that part of the place devoted to the sale of
bedding, than they were surrounded by the most seducing offers and
solicitations.

"Walk in, sir, and look at my mattresses, if you please," said one.
"They are quite new. I will just open a corner to show you how
beautifully white and soft the wool is,--more like the wool of a lamb
than a sheep."

"My pretty lady, step in and see my beautiful, fine white sheets. They
are better than new, for the first stiffness has been taken out of them.
They are soft as a glove, and strong as iron."

"Come, my new-married couple, treat yourselves to one of my handsome
counterpanes. Only see how soft, light, and warm it is,--quite as good
as eider-down,--every bit the same as new,--never been used twenty
times. Now, then, my good lady, persuade your husband to treat you to
one. Let me have the pleasure of serving you, and I will fit you up for
housekeeping as cheaply as you can desire. Oh, you'll be pleased, I
know,--you'll come again to see Mother Bouvard! You will find I keep
everything. I bought a splendid lot of second-hand goods yesterday. Pray
walk in and let me have the pleasure of showing them to you. Come, you
may as well see if you don't buy. I shall charge you nothing for looking
at them."

"I tell you what, neighbour," said Rodolph to Rigolette, "this fat old
lady shall have the preference. She takes us for husband and wife. I am
so pleased with her for the idea that I decide upon laying out my money
at her shop."

"Well, then, let it be the fat old lady," said Rigolette. "I like her
appearance, too."

Rigolette and her companion then went into Mother Bouvard's. By a
magnanimity, perhaps unexampled before in the Temple, the rivals of
Mother Bouvard made no disturbance at the preference awarded to her. One
of her neighbours, indeed, went so far as to say:

[Illustration: _Drew carefully out a sheet of paper._
Original Etching by Adrian Marcel.]

"So long as it is Mother Bouvard, and no one else, that has this
customer; she has a family, and is the dowager and the honour of the
Temple."

It was, indeed, impossible to have a face more prepossessing, more open,
and more frank than that of the dowager of the Temple.

"Here, my pretty little woman," she said to Rigolette, who was looking
at sundry articles with the eye of a connoisseur, "this is the
second-hand bargain I told you of: two bed furnitures and bedding
complete, and as good as new. If you would like a small old _secrétaire_
very cheap, here is one (and Mother Bouvard pointed to one). I had it in
the same lot. I do not usually buy furniture, but I could not refuse
this, for the poor people of whom I had it appeared to be so very
unhappy! Poor lady! it was the sale of this piece of furniture which
seemed to cut her to the very heart. I dare say it was a family piece of
'furniture.'"

At these words, and whilst the shopkeeper was settling with Rigolette as
to the prices of the various articles of purchase, Rodolph was
attentively looking at the _secrétaire_ which Mother Bouvard had pointed
out. It was one of those ancient pieces of rosewood furniture, almost
triangular in shape, closed by a front panel, which let down, and,
supported by two long brass hinges, served for a writing-table. In the
centre of this panel, which was inlaid with ornaments of wood of
different patterns, Rodolph observed a cipher let in, of ebony, and
which consisted of an M. and an R., intertwined and surmounted with a
count's coronet. He conjectured, therefore, that the last possessor of
this piece of furniture was a person in an elevated rank of society. His
curiosity increased, and he looked at the _secrétaire_ with redoubled
scrutiny; he opened the drawers mechanically, one after the other, when,
having some difficulty in drawing out the last, and trying to discover
the obstacle, he perceived, and drew carefully out, a sheet of paper,
half shut up between the drawer and the bottom of the opening. Whilst
Rigolette was concluding her bargain with Mother Bouvard, Rodolph was
engrossed in examining what he had found. From the numerous erasures
which covered this paper, he perceived that it was the copy of an
unfinished letter. Rodolph, with considerable difficulty, made out what
follows:

      "SIR: Be assured that the most extreme misery alone could compel
    me to the step which I now take. It is not mistaken pride which
    causes my scruples, but the absolute want of any and every claim
    on you for the service which I am about to ask. The sight of my
    daughter, reduced, as well as myself, to the most frightful
    destitution, has made me throw aside all hesitation. A few words
    only as to the cause of the misfortunes which have overwhelmed
    me. After the death of my husband, all my fortune was three
    hundred thousand francs (12,000_l._), which was placed by my
    brother with M. Jacques Ferrand, the notary; I received at
    Angers, whither I had settled with my daughter, the interest of
    this sum, remitted to me by my brother. You know, sir, the
    horrible event which put an end to his days. Ruined, as it
    seems, by secret and unfortunate speculations, he put an end to
    his existence eight months since. After this sad event, I
    received a few lines, written by him in desperation before this
    awful deed. 'When I should peruse them,' he wrote, 'he should no
    longer exist.' He terminated this letter by informing me that he
    had not any acknowledgment of the sum which he had placed, in my
    name, with M. Jacques Ferrand, as that individual never gave any
    receipt, but was honour and piety itself; that, therefore, it
    would be sufficient for me to present myself to that gentleman,
    and my business would be regularly and satisfactorily adjusted.
    As soon as I was able to turn my attention to anything besides
    the mournful end of my poor brother, I came to Paris, where I
    knew no one, sir, but yourself, and you only by the connection
    that had subsisted between yourself and my husband. I have told
    you that the sum deposited with M. Jacques Ferrand was my entire
    fortune, and that my brother forwarded to me every six months
    the interest which arose from that sum. More than a year had
    elapsed since the last payment, and, consequently, I went to M.
    Jacques Ferrand to ask the amount of him, as I was greatly in
    want of it. Scarcely was I in his presence, than, without any
    consideration of my grief, he accused my brother of having
    borrowed two thousand francs of him, which he had lost by his
    death, adding, that not only was suicide a crime before God and
    man, but, also, that it was an act of robbery, of which he, M.
    Jacques Ferrand, was the victim. I was indignant at such
    language, for the remarkable probity of my poor brother was well
    known; he had, it is true, unknown to me and his friends, lost
    his fortune in hazardous speculations, but he had died with an
    unspotted reputation, deeply regretted by all, and not leaving
    any debt except to his notary. I replied to M. Ferrand, that I
    authorised him at once to take the two thousand francs, which he
    claimed from my brother, from the three hundred thousand francs
    of mine, which had been deposited with him. At these words, he
    looked at me with an air of utter astonishment, and asked me
    what three hundred thousand francs I alluded to. 'To those which
    my brother placed in your hands eighteen months ago, sir, and of
    which I have, till now, received the interest paid by you
    through my brother,' I replied, not comprehending his question.
    The notary shrugged his shoulders, smiled disdainfully, as if my
    words were not serious, and replied that, so far from depositing
    any money with him, my brother had borrowed two thousand francs
    from him.

      "It is impossible for me to express to you my horror at this
    reply. 'What, then, has become of this sum?' I exclaimed. 'My
    daughter and myself have no other resource, and, if we are
    deprived of that, nothing remains for us but complete
    wretchedness. What will become of us?' 'I really don't know,'
    replied the notary, coldly. 'It is most probable that your
    brother, instead of placing this sum with me, as you say, has
    used it in those unfortunate speculations in which, unknown to
    any one, he was engaged.' 'It is false, sir!' I exclaimed. 'My
    brother was honour itself, and, so far from despoiling me and my
    daughter, he would have sacrificed himself for us. He would
    never marry, in order that he might leave all he had to my
    child.' 'Dare you to assert, madame, that I am capable of
    denying a deposit confided in me?' inquired the notary, with
    indignation, which seemed so honourable and sincere that I
    replied, 'No, certainly not, sir; your reputation for probity is
    well known; but yet I can never accuse my brother of so cruel an
    abuse of confidence.' 'What are your proofs of this claim?'
    inquired M. Ferrand. 'I have none, sir. Eighteen months since,
    my brother, who undertook the management of my affairs, wrote to
    me, saying, "I have an excellent opportunity of obtaining six
    per cent.; send me your power of attorney to sell your stock, and
    I will deposit the three hundred thousand francs, which I will
    make up, with M. Jacques Ferrand, the notary." I sent the papers
    which he asked for to my brother, and a few days afterwards he
    informed me that the investment was made by you, and at the end
    of six months he remitted to me the interest due.' 'At least,
    then, you have some letters on this subject, madame?' 'No, sir;
    they were only on family matters, and I did not preserve them.'
    'Unfortunately, madame, I cannot do anything in this matter,'
    replied the notary. 'If my honesty was not beyond all suspicion,
    all attack, I should say to you, the courts of law are open to
    you,--attack me; the judges will have to choose between the word
    of an honourable man, who for thirty years has had the esteem of
    worthy men, and the posthumous declaration of a man who, after
    being ruined in most foolish undertakings, has found refuge only
    in suicide. I say to you now, attack me, madame, if you dare,
    and your brother's memory will be dishonoured! But I believe you
    will have the good sense to resign yourself to a misfortune
    which, no doubt, is very severe, but to which I am an entire
    stranger.' 'But, sir, I am a mother! If my fortune is lost, my
    daughter and I have nothing left but a small stock of furniture;
    if that is sold, we have nothing left, sir,--nothing, but the
    most frightful destitution staring us in the face.' 'You have
    been cheated,--it is a misfortune, but I can do nothing in the
    matter,' answered the notary. 'Once more, madame, your brother
    has deceived you. If you doubt between his word and mine, attack
    me; go to law, and the judges will decide.' I quitted the
    notary's in the deepest despair. What could I do in this
    extremity? I had no means of proving the validity of my claim; I
    was convinced of the strict honour of my brother, and confounded
    at the assertion of M. Ferrand, and having no person to whom I
    could turn for advice (for you were travelling), and knowing
    that I must have money to pay for legal opinions and advice, and
    desiring to preserve the very little that I had left, I dared
    not commence a suit at law. It was at this juncture--"

This sketch of the letter ended here, for what followed was covered with
ink erasures, which completely blotted out the lines. At the bottom of
the page, and in the corner, Rodolph found this kind of memorandum:

    "To write to the Duchesse de Lucenay, for M. de Saint-Remy."

Rodolph remained deeply thoughtful after the perusal of this fragment of
a letter, in which he had found two names whose connection struck him.
Although the fresh infamy which appeared to accuse Jacques Ferrand was
not proved, yet this man had proved himself so pitiless towards the
unhappy Morel, had behaved so shamefully to Louise, his daughter, that
the denial of a deposit, protected by certain impunity, on the part of
such a wretch, appeared to him by no means improbable. This mother, who
claimed a fortune which had disappeared so strangely, was, doubtless,
used to a life of ease and comfort. Ruined by a sudden blow, and knowing
no one in Paris, as the letter said, what must have been the existence
of these two females, perhaps utterly destitute and alone in the midst
of this vast metropolis!

The prince had, as we know, promised sure occupation to madame, by
giving her accidentally, and to employ her mind, a part to play in some
future work of charity, being certain to find sure misery for her to
curtail before his next meeting with that lady. He thought that,
perhaps, chance might bring before him some unfortunate and worthy
person, who would, as he trusted, interest the heart and imagination of
Madame d'Harville. The sketch of the letter which he held in his hands,
and the copy of which had, doubtless, never been sent to the person
whose assistance was implored, evinced a high and resigned mind, which
would revolt from an offer of alms. So, then, how many precautions, how
many plans, how much delicacy, must be employed to conceal the source of
such generous succour, or to make it accepted! And, then, how much
address to introduce oneself to such a female, in order to judge if she
really merited the interest which she seemed capable of inspiring!
Rodolph foresaw in the development of this mysterious affair a multitude
of new and touching emotions, which would singularly attract Madame
d'Harville in the way he had previously proposed to her.

"Well, husband," said Rigolette, gaily, to Rodolph, "what is there so
interesting in that piece of paper, which you are reading there?"

"My little wife," replied Rodolph, "you are very inquisitive; I will
tell you by and by. Have you bought all you want?"

"Yes; and your poor friends will be set up like kings. There is nothing
to do now but to pay; Madame Bouvard has made every allowance, I must do
her that credit."

"My little wife, an idea occurs to me; whilst I am paying, suppose you
go and choose the clothes for Madame Morel and her children? I confess
my ignorance on the subject of such purchases. You can tell them to
bring everything here, and then all the things will be together, and the
poor people will have everything at once."

"You are right, husband. Wait here, and I shall not be long; I know two
shopkeepers here, where I am a regular customer, and I shall find in
their shops all I require."

And Rigolette went out, saying:

"Madame Bouvard, take care of my husband, and do not flirt with him,
mind, whilst I am gone."

And then came the laugh, and away the merry maiden ran.

"I must say, sir," said Mother Bouvard to Rodolph, "that you have a
capital little manager there. _Peste!_ she knows how to make a bargain!
And then she is so prettily behaved and pretty-looking! red and white,
with those large, beautiful black eyes, and such hair!"

"Is she not charming? and ain't I a happy husband, Madame Bouvard?"

"As happy a husband as she is a wife, I am sure of that."

"You are not mistaken. But tell me how much I owe you."

"Your little lady would only give me three hundred and thirty francs for
the whole; as true as heaven's above us, I only make fifteen francs by
the bargain, for I did not try to get the things as cheaply as I might,
for I hadn't the heart to bate 'em down; the people who sold 'em seemed
so uncommon miserable!"

"Really! Were they the same people that you bought this little
_secrétaire_ of?"

"Yes, sir; and it cuts my heart to think of it! Only imagine, the day
before yesterday there came here a young and still pretty girl, but so
pale and thin one could almost see through her; and you know that pains
people that have any feeling at all. Although she was, as they say, neat
as a new-made pin, her old threadbare black worsted shawl, her black
stuff gown, which was also worn bare, her straw bonnet, in the month of
January, for she was in mourning, all showed what we call great
distress, for I am sure she was a real lady. At last, blushing up to the
very eyes, she asked me if I would buy two beds and bedding complete,
and a little old _secrétaire_. I said that, as I sold, of course I
bought, and that if they would suit me I would have them, but that I
must see the things. She then asked me to go with her to her apartment,
not far off, on the other side of the Boulevards, in a house on the Quay
of St. Martin's Canal. I left my niece in the shop, and followed the
lady until we reached a smallish house at the bottom of a court; we went
up to the fourth floor, and, the lady having knocked, the door was
opened by a young girl about fourteen years of age, who was also in
mourning, and equally pale and thin, but still very, very pretty, so
much so that I was quite astonished."

"Well, and this young girl?"

"Was the daughter of the lady in mourning. Though it was very cold, yet
a thin gown of black cotton with white spots, and a small, shabby
mourning shawl, that was all she had on her."

"And their rooms were wretched?"

"Imagine, sir, two little rooms, very neat, but nearly empty, and so
cold that I was almost froze; there was not a spark of fire in the
grate, nor any appearance of there having been any for a very long time.
All the furniture was two beds, two chairs, a chest of drawers, an old
portmanteau, and the small _secrétaire_, and on the chest was a parcel,
wrapped in a pocket-handkerchief. This small parcel was all the mother
and child had left when their furniture was once sold. The landlord had
taken the two bedsteads, the chairs, a trunk, and a table, for what was
due to him, as the porter said, who had gone up-stairs with us. Then the
lady begged me fairly to estimate the mattresses, sheets, curtains, and
quilts; and, as I am an honest woman, sir, although it is my business to
buy cheap and sell dear, yet, when I saw the poor young thing with her
eyes full of tears, and her mother, who, in spite of her affected
calmness, seemed to be weeping in her heart, I offered for the things
fifteen francs more than they were worth to sell again, I swear I did; I
agreed, too, just to oblige them, to take this small _secrétaire_,
although it is not a sort of thing I ever deal in."

"I will buy it of you, Madame Bouvard."

"Will you though? So much the better, sir, for it is else likely to stay
with me for some time; I took it, as I say, only to oblige the poor
lady. I told her then what I would give for the things, and I expected
that she would haggle a bit and ask me something more, I did. Then it
was that I saw she was not one of the common; she was in downright
misery, she was, and no mistake about it, I am sure! I says to her,
'It's worth so much,' She answers me, and says, 'Very well; let us go
back to your shop, and you can pay me there, for we shall not return
here again to this house.' Then she says to her daughter, who was
sitting on the trunk a-crying, 'Claire, take this bundle.' I remember
her name, and I'm sure she called her Claire. Then the young lady got
up, but, as she was crossing the room, as she came to the little
_secrétaire_ she went down on her knees before it, and, dear heart! how
the poor thing did sob! 'Courage, my dear child; remember some one sees
you,' said her mother to her, in a low voice, but yet I heard her. You
may tell, sir, they were poor, but very proud notwithstanding. When the
lady gave me the key of the little _secrétaire_, I saw a tear in her red
eyes, and it seemed as if her very heart bled at parting with this old
piece of furniture; but she tried to keep up her courage, and not seem
downcast before strangers. Then she told the porter that I should come
and take away all that the landlord did not keep, and after that we came
back here. The young lady gave her arm to her mother, and carried in her
hand the small bundle, which contained all they possessed in the world.
I handed them their three hundred and fifteen francs, and then I never
saw them again."

"But their name?"

"I don't know; the lady sold me the things in the presence of the
porter, and so I had no occasion to ask her name, for what she sold
belonged to her."

"But their new address?"

"I don't know that either."

"No doubt they know at their old lodging?"

"No, sir; for, when I went back to get the things, the porter told me,
speaking of the mother and daughter, 'that they were very quiet people,
very respectable, and very unfortunate,--I hope no misfortune has
happened to them! They appeared to be very calm and composed, but I am
sure they were quite in despair.' 'And where are they gone now to
lodge?' I asked. '_Ma foi_, I don't know!' was the answer; 'they left
without telling me, and I am sure they will not return here.'"

The hopes which Rodolph had entertained for a moment vanished; how could
he go to work to discover these two unfortunate females, when all the
trace he had of them was that the young daughter's name was Claire, and
the fragment of a letter, of which we have already made mention, and at
the bottom of which were these words:

    "To write to Madame de Lucenay, for M. de Saint-Remy?"

The only, and very remote chance of discovering the traces of these
unfortunates was through Madame de Lucenay, who, fortunately, was on
intimate terms with Madame d'Harville.

"Here, ma'am, be so good as to take your money," said Rodolph to the
shopkeeper, handing her a note for five hundred francs.

"I will give you the change, sir. What is your address?"

"Rue du Temple, No. 17."

"Rue du Temple, No. 17; oh, very well, very well, I know it."

"Have you ever been to that house?"

"Often. First I bought the furniture of a woman there, who lent money on
wages; it is not a very creditable business, to be sure, but that's no
affair of mine,--she sells, I buy, and so that's settled. Another time,
not six weeks ago, I went there again for the furniture of a young man,
who lived on the fourth floor, and was moving away."

"M. François Germain, perhaps?" said Rodolph.

"Just so. Did you know him?"

"Very well; and, unfortunately, he has not left his present address in
the Rue du Temple, so I do not know where to find him. But where shall
we find a cart to take the goods?"

"As it is not far, a large truck will do, and old Jérome is close by, my
regular commissionaire. If you wish to know the address of M. François
Germain, I can help you."

"What? Do you know where he lives?"

"Not exactly, but I know where you may be sure to meet with him."

"Where?"

"At the notary's where he works."

"At a notary's?"

"Yes, who lives in the Rue du Sentier."

"M. Jacques Ferrand?" exclaimed Rodolph.

"Yes; and a very worthy man he is. There is a crucifix and some holy
boxwood in his study; it looks just as if one was in a sacristy."

"But how did you know that M. Germain worked at this notary's?"

"Why, this way: this young man came to me to ask me to buy his little
lot of furniture all of a lump. So that time, too, though rather out of
my line, I bought all his kit, and brought it here, because he seemed a
nice young fellow, and I had a pleasure in obliging him. Well, I bought
him right clean out, and I paid him well; he was, no doubt, very well
satisfied, for, a fortnight afterwards, he came again, to buy some bed
furniture from me. A commissionaire, with a truck, went with him,
everything was packed: well, but, at the moment he was going to pay me,
lo and behold! he had forgotten his purse; but he looked so like an
honest man that I said to him, 'Take the things with you,--never mind, I
shall be passing your way, and will call for the money.' 'Very good,'
says he; 'but I am never at home, so call to-morrow in the Rue du
Sentier, at M. Jacques Ferrand's, the notary, where I am employed, and I
will pay you.' I went next day, and he paid me; only, what was very odd
to me was that he sold his things, and then, a fortnight afterwards, he
buys others."

Rodolph thought that he was able to account for this singular fact.
Germain was desirous of destroying every trace from the wretches who
were pursuing him: fearing, no doubt, that his removal might put them on
the scent of his fresh abode, he had preferred, in order to avoid this
danger, selling his goods, and afterwards buying others.

The prince was overjoyed to think of the happiness in store for Madame
Georges, who would thus, at length, see again that son so long and
vainly sought.

Rigolette now returned, with a joyful eye and smiling lips.

"Well, did not I tell you so?" she exclaimed. "I am not deceived: we
shall have spent six hundred and forty francs all together, and the
Morels will be set up like princes. Here come the shopkeepers; are they
not loaded? Nothing will now be wanting for the family; they will have
everything requisite, even to a gridiron, two newly tinned saucepans,
and a coffee-pot. I said to myself, since they are to have things done
so grandly, let them be grand; and, with all that, I shall not have lost
more than three hours. But come, neighbour, pay as quickly as you can,
and let us be gone. It will soon be noon, and my needle must go at a
famous rate to make up for this morning."

Rodolph paid, and quitted the Temple with Rigolette.

At the moment when the grisette and her companion were entering the
passage, they were almost knocked over by Madame Pipelet, who was
running out, frightened, troubled, and aghast.

"Mercy on us!" said Rigolette, "what ails you, Madame Pipelet? Where are
you running to in that manner?"

"Is it you, Mlle. Rigolette?" exclaimed Anastasie; "it is Providence
that sends you; help me to save the life of Alfred."

"What do you mean?"

"The darling old duck has fainted. Have mercy on us! Run for me, and get
me two sous' worth of absinthe at the dram-shop,--the strongest, mind;
it is his remedy when he is indisposed in the pylorus,--that generally
sets him up again. Be kind, and do not refuse me, I can then return to
Alfred; I am all over in such a fluster."

Rigolette let go Rodolph's arm, and ran quickly to the dram-shop.

"But what has happened, Madame Pipelet?" inquired Rodolph, following the
porteress into the lodge.

"How can I tell, my worthy sir? I had gone out to the mayor's, to
church, and the cook-shop, to save Alfred so much trotting about; I
returned, and what should I see but the dear old cosset with his legs
and arms all in the air! There, M. Rodolph," said Anastasie, opening the
door of her dog-hole, "say if that is not enough to break one's heart!"

Lamentable spectacle! With his bell-crowned hat still on his head, even
further on than usual, for the ambiguous castor, pushed down, no doubt,
by violence, to judge by a transverse gap, covered M. Pipelet's eyes,
who was on his back on the ground at the foot of his bed. The fainting
was over, and Alfred was beginning to make some slight gesticulations
with his hands, as if he sought to repulse somebody or something, and
then he tried to push off this troublesome visor, with which he had been
bonneted.

"He kicks,--that's a beautiful symptom! He comes to!" exclaimed the
porteress, who, stooping down, bawled in his ears, "What's the matter
with my Alfred? It's his 'Stasie who is with him. How goes it now?
There's some absinthe coming, that will set you up." Then, assuming a
falsetto voice of much endearment, she added: "What, did they abuse and
assassinate him,--the dear old darling, the delight of his 'Stasie, eh?"

Alfred heaved an immense sigh, and, with a mighty groan, uttered the
fatal word:

"Cabrion!"

And his tremulous hands again seemed desirous of repulsing the fearful
vision.

"Cabrion! What, that cussed painter again?" exclaimed Madame Pipelet.
"Alfred dreamed of him all night long, so that he kicked me almost to
death. This monster is his nightmare; not only does he poison his days,
but he poisons his nights also,--he pursues him in his very sleep; yes,
sir, as though Alfred was a malefactor, and this Cabrion, whom may
Heaven confound! was his unceasing remorse."

Rodolph smiled, discreetly detecting some new freak of Rigolette's
former neighbour.

"Alfred! answer me; don't remain mute, you frighten me," said Madame
Pipelet; "let's try and get you up. Why, lovey, do you keep thinking of
that vagabond fellow? You know that, when you think of that fellow, it
has the same effect on you that cabbage has,--it fills up your pylorus
and stifles you."

"Cabrion!" repeated M. Pipelet, pushing up, with an effort, the hat
which had fallen so low over his eyes, which he rolled around him with
an affrighted air.

Rigolette entered, carrying a small bottle of absinthe.

"Thankee, ma'amselle, you are so kind!" said the old body; and then she
added, "Come, deary, suck this down, that will make you all right."

And Anastasie, presenting the phial quickly to M. Pipelet's lips,
contrived to make him swallow the absinthe. In vain did Alfred struggle
vigorously. His wife, taking advantage of the victim's weakness, held up
his head firmly with one hand, whilst with the other she introduced the
neck of the little bottle between his teeth, and compelled him to
swallow the absinthe, after which she exclaimed, triumphantly:

"Ther-r-r-r-e, now-w-w! you're on your pins again, my ducky!"

And Alfred, having wiped his mouth with the back of his hand, opened his
eyes, rose, and inquired, in accents of alarm:

"Have you seen him?"

"Who?"

"Is he gone?"

"Who, Alfred?"

"_Cabrion!_"

"Has he dared--" asked the porteress.

M. Pipelet, as mute as the statue of the commandant, like that
redoubtable spectre, bowed his head twice with an affirmative air.

"What! has M. Cabrion been here?" inquired Rigolette, repressing a
violent desire to laugh.

"What! has the monster been unchained on Alfred?" said Madame Pipelet.
"Oh, if I had been there with my broom, he should have swallowed it,
handle and all! But tell us, Alfred, all about this horrid affair."

M. Pipelet made signs with his hand that he was about to speak, and they
listened to the man with the bell-crowned hat in religious silence,
whilst he expressed himself in these terms, and in a voice of deep
emotion:

"My wife had left me, to save me the trouble of going out, according to
the request of monsieur," bowing to Rodolph, "to the mayor's, to church,
and the cook-shop."

"The dear old darling had had the nightmare all night, and I wished to
save him the journey," said Anastasie.

"This nightmare was sent me as a warning from on high," responded the
porter, religiously. "I had dreamed of Cabrion, and I was to suffer from
Cabrion. Here was I sitting quietly in front of my table, reflecting on
an alteration which I wished to make in the upper leather of this boot
confided to my hands, when I heard a noise, a rustling, at the window of
my lodge,--was it a presentiment, a warning from on high? My heart beat,
I lifted up my head, and, through the pane of glass, I saw--I saw--"

"Cabrion!" exclaimed Anastasie, clasping her hands.

"Cabrion!" replied M. Pipelet, gloomily. "His hideous face was there,
pressed close against the window, and he was looking at me with eyes
like a cat's--what do I say?--a tiger's! just as in my dream. I tried to
speak, but my tongue clave to my mouth; I tried to rise, I was nailed to
my seat. My boot fell from my hands, and, as in all the critical and
important events of my life, I remained perfectly motionless. Then the
key turned in the lock, the door opened,--Cabrion entered!"

"He entered? Owdacious monster!" replied Madame Pipelet, as much
astonished as her spouse at such audacity.

"He entered slowly," resumed Alfred, "stopped a moment at the threshold,
as if to fascinate me with his look, atrocious as it was, then he
advanced towards me, pausing at each step, and piercing me through with
his eye, but not uttering a word,--straight, mute, and threatening as a
phantom!"

"I declare, my very heart aches to hear him," said Anastasie.

"I remained still more motionless, and glued to my chair; Cabrion still
advanced slowly towards me, fixing his eye as the serpent glares at the
bird; he so frightened me that, in spite of myself, I kept my eye on
him; he came close to me, and then I could no longer endure his
revolting aspect, it was too much, and I could not. I shut my eyes, and
then I felt that he dared to place his hands upon my hat, which he took
by the crown and lifted gently off my head, leaving it bare. I began to
be seized with vertigo, my breathing was suspended, there was a singing
in my ears, and I was completely fastened to my seat, and I closed my
eyes still closer and closer. Then Cabrion stooped, took my head between
his hands, which were as cold as death, and on my forehead, covered with
an icy damp, he deposited a brazen kiss, indecent wretch!"

Anastasie lifted her hands towards heaven.

"My enemy, the most deadly, imprinted a kiss on my forehead; such a
monstrosity overcame and paralysed me. Cabrion profited by my stupor to
place my hat on my head, and then, with a blow of his fist, drove it
down over my eyes, as you saw. This last outrage destroyed me; the
measure was full, all about me was turning around, and I fainted at the
moment when I saw him, from under the rim of my hat, leave the lodge as
quietly and slowly as he had entered."

Then, as if the recital had exhausted all his strength, M. Pipelet fell
back in his chair, raising his hands to heaven in a manner of mute
imprecation. Rigolette went out quickly; she could not restrain herself
any longer; her desire to laugh almost stifled her. Rodolph had the
greatest difficulty to keep his countenance.

Suddenly there was a confused murmur, such as announces the arrival of a
mob, heard from the street, and a great noise came from the door at the
top of the entrance, and then butts of grounded muskets were heard on
the steps of the door.




CHAPTER II.

THE ARREST.


"Good gracious! M. Rodolph," exclaimed Rigolette, running in, pale and
trembling, "a commissary of police and the guard have come here."

"Divine justice watches over me," said M. Pipelet, in a transport of
pious gratitude. "They have come to arrest Cabrion; unfortunately it is
too late."

A commissary of police, wearing his tricoloured scarf around his waist
underneath his black coat, entered the lodge. His countenance was
impressive, magisterial, and serious.

"M. le Commissaire is too late; the malefactor has escaped," said M.
Pipelet, in a sorrowful voice; "but I will give you his
description,--villainous smile, impudent look, insulting--"

"Of whom do you speak?" inquired the magistrate.

"Of Cabrion, M. le Commissaire; but, perhaps, if you make all haste, it
is not yet too late to catch him," added M. Pipelet.

"I know nothing about any Cabrion," said the magistrate, impatiently.
"Does one Jérome Morel, a working lapidary, live in this house?"

"Yes, mon commissaire," said Madame Pipelet, putting herself into a
military attitude.

"Conduct me to his apartment."

"Morel, the lapidary!" said the porteress, excessively surprised; "why,
he is the mildest lambkin in the world. He is incapable of--"

"Does Jérome Morel live here or not?"

"He lives here, sir, with his family, in one of the attics."

"Lead me to his attic."

Then, addressing himself to a man who accompanied him, the magistrate
said:

"Let two of the municipal guard wait below, and not leave the entrance.
Send Justing for a hackney-coach."

The man left the lodge to put these orders in execution.

"Now," continued the magistrate, addressing himself to M. Pipelet, "lead
me to Morel."

"If it is all the same to you, mon commissaire, I will do that for
Alfred; he is indisposed from Cabrion's behaviour, which, just as the
cabbage does, troubles his pylorus."

"You or your husband, it is no matter which. Go forward."

And, preceded by Madame Pipelet, he ascended the staircase, but soon
stopped when he saw Rodolph and Rigolette following him.

"Who are you, and what do you want?" he inquired.

"They are two lodgers in the fourth story," said Madame Pipelet.

"I beg your pardon, sir, I did not know that you belonged to the house,"
said he to Rodolph.

The latter, auguring well from the polite behaviour of the magistrate,
said to him:

"You are going to see a family in a state of deep misery, sir. I do not
know what fresh stroke of ill fortune threatens this unhappy artisan,
but he has been cruelly tried last night,--one of his daughters, worn
down by illness, is dead before his eyes,--dead from cold and misery."

"Is it possible?"

"It is, indeed, the fact, mon commissaire," said Madame Pipelet. "But
for this gentleman who speaks to you, and who is a king of lodgers, for
he has saved poor Morel from prison by his generosity, the whole family
of the lapidary must have died of hunger."

The commissary looked at Rodolph with equal surprise and interest.

"Nothing is more easily explained, sir," said Rodolph. "A person who is
very charitable, learning that Morel, whose honour and honesty I will
guarantee to you, was in a most deplorable and unmerited state of
distress, authorised me to pay a bill of exchange for which the bailiffs
were about to drag off to prison this poor workman, the sole support of
his numerous family."

The magistrate, in his turn, struck by the noble physiognomy of Rodolph,
as well as the dignity of his manners, replied:

"I have no doubt of Morel's probity. I only regret I have to fulfil a
painful duty in your presence, sir, who have so deeply interested
yourself in this family."

"What do you mean, sir?"

"From the services you have rendered to the Morels, and your language, I
see, sir, that you are a worthy person. Having, besides, no reason for
concealing the object of the warrant which I have to execute, I will
confess to you that I am about to apprehend Louise Morel, the lapidary's
daughter."

The recollection of the rouleau of gold, offered to the bailiffs by the
young girl, occurred to Rodolph.

"Of what is she then accused?"

"She lies under a charge of child-murder."

"She! she! Oh, her poor father!"

"From what you have told me, sir, I imagine that, under the miserable
circumstances in which this artisan is, this fresh blow will be terrible
for him. Unfortunately, I must carry out the full instructions with
which I am charged."

"But it is at present only an accusation?" asked Rodolph. "Proofs, no
doubt, are still wanting?"

"I cannot tell you more on that point. Justice has been informed of this
crime, or rather the presumptive crime, by the statement of an
individual most respectable in every particular, Louise Morel's master."

"Jacques Ferrand, the notary?" said Rodolph, with indignation.

"Yes, sir--"

"M. Jacques Ferrand is a wretch, sir!"

"I am pained to see that you do not know the person of whom you speak,
sir. M. Jacques Ferrand is one of the most honourable men in the world;
his rectitude is universally recognised."

"I repeat to you, sir, that this notary is a wretch. It was he who
sought to send Morel to prison because his daughter repulsed his
libidinous proposals. If Louise is only accused on the denunciation of
such a man, you must own, sir, that the charge deserves but very little
credit."

"It is not my affair, sir, and I am very glad of it, to discuss the
depositions of M. Ferrand," said the magistrate, coldly. "Justice is
informed in this matter, and it is for a court of law to decide. As for
me, I have a warrant to apprehend Louise Morel, and that warrant I must
put into execution."

"You are quite right, sir, and I regret that an impulse of feeling,
however just, should have made me forget for a moment that this was
neither the time nor the place for such a discussion. One word only: the
corpse of the child which Morel has lost is still in the attic, and I
have offered my apartments to the family to spare them the sad spectacle
of the dead body. You will, therefore, find the lapidary, and possibly
his daughter, in my rooms. I entreat you, sir, in the name of humanity,
do not apprehend Louise abruptly in the midst of the unhappy family only
a short time since snatched from their state of utter wretchedness.
Morel has had so many shocks during this night that it is really to be
feared his reason may sink under it; already his wife is dangerously
ill, and such a blow would kill him."

"Sir, I have always executed my orders with every possible
consideration, and I shall act similarly now."

"Will you allow me, sir, to ask you one favour? It is this: the young
female who is following us occupies an apartment close to mine, which, I
have no doubt, she would place at your disposal. You could, in the first
instance, send for Louise, and, if necessary, for Morel afterwards, that
his daughter may take leave of him. You will thus save a poor sick and
infirm mother from a very distressing scene."

"Most willingly, sir, if it can be so arranged."

The conversation we have just described was carried on in an undertone,
whilst Rigolette and Madame Pipelet kept away discreetly a few steps'
distance from the commissary and Rodolph. The latter then went to the
grisette, whom the presence of the commissary had greatly affrighted,
and said to her:

"My good little neighbour, I want another service from you,--I want you
to leave your room at my disposal for the next hour."

"As long as you please, M. Rodolph. You have the key. But, oh, say what
is the matter?"

"I will tell you all by and by. But I want something more; you must
return to the Temple, and tell them not to bring our purchases here for
the next hour."

"To be sure I will, M. Rodolph; but has any fresh misfortune befallen
the Morels?"

"Alas! yes, something very sad indeed, which you will learn but too
soon."

"Well, then, neighbour, I will run to the Temple. Alas, alas! I was
thinking that, thanks to your kindness, these poor people had been quite
relieved from their trouble!" said the grisette, who then descended the
staircase very quickly.

Rodolph had been very desirous of sparing Rigolette the distressing
scene of Louise Morel's arrest.

"Mon commissaire," said Madame Pipelet, "since my king of lodgers will
direct you, I may return to my Alfred. I am uneasy about him, for when I
left him he had hardly recovered from his indisposition which Cabrion
had caused."

"Go, go," said the magistrate, who was thus left alone with Rodolph.

They both ascended to the landing-place on the fourth story, at the door
of the chamber in which the lapidary and his family had been temporarily
established.

Suddenly the door opened. Louise, pale and in tears, came out quickly.

"Adieu, adieu, father!" she exclaimed. "I will come back again, but I
must go now."

"Louise, my child, listen to me a moment," said Morel, following his
daughter, and endeavouring to detain her.

At the sight of Rodolph and the magistrate, Louise and the lapidary
remained motionless.

"Ah, sir, you, our kind benefactor!" said the artisan, recognising
Rodolph, "assist me in preventing Louise from leaving us. I do not know
what is the matter with her, but she quite frightens me, she is so
determined to go. Now there is no occasion for her to return to her
master, is there, sir? Did you not say to me, 'Louise shall not again
leave you, and that will recompense you for much that you have
suffered?' Ah! at that kind promise, I confess that for a moment I had
forgot the death of my poor little Adèle; but I must not again be
separated from thee, Louise, oh, never, never!"

Rodolph was wounded to the heart, and was unable to utter a word in
reply.

The commissary said sternly to Louise:

"Is your name Louise Morel?"

"Yes, sir," replied the young girl, quite overcome.

"You are Jérome Morel, her father?" added the magistrate, addressing the
lapidary.

Rodolph had opened the door of Rigolette's apartment.

"Yes, sir; but--"

"Go in there with your daughter."

And the magistrate pointed to Rigolette's chamber, into which Rodolph
had already entered.

Reassured by his preserver, the lapidary and Louise, astonished and
uneasy, did as the commissary desired them.

The commissary shut the door, and said with much feeling to Morel:

"I know that you are honest and unfortunate, and it is, therefore, with
regret that I tell you that I am here in the name of the law to
apprehend your daughter."

"All is discovered,--I am lost!" cried Louise, in agony, and throwing
herself into her father's arms.

"What do you say? What do you say?" inquired Morel, stupefied. "You are
mad! What do you mean by lost? Apprehend you! Why apprehend you? Who has
come to apprehend you?"

"I, and in the name of the law;" and the commissary showed his scarf.

"Oh, wretched, wretched girl!" exclaimed Louise, falling on her knees.

"What! in the name of the law?" said the artisan, whose reason, severely
shaken by this fresh blow, began to totter. "Why apprehend my daughter
in the name of the law? I will answer for Louise, I will,--this my
child, my good child, ain't you, Louise? What! apprehend you, when our
good angel has restored you to us to console us for the death of our
poor, dear little Adèle? Come, come, this can't be. And then, to speak
respectfully, M. le Commissaire, they apprehend none but the bad, you
know; and my Louise is not bad. So you see, my dear, the good gentleman
is mistaken. My name is Morel, but there are other Morels; you are
Louise, but there are other Louises; so you see, M. le Commissaire,
there is a mistake, certainly some mistake!"

"Unhappily there is no mistake. Louise Morel, take leave of your
father!"

"What! are you going to take my daughter away?" exclaimed the workman,
furious with grief, and advancing towards the magistrate with a menacing
air.

Rodolph seized the lapidary by the arm, and said to him:

"Be calm, and hope for the best; your daughter will be restored to you;
her innocence must be proved; she cannot be guilty."

"Guilty of what? She is not guilty of anything. I will put my hand in
the fire if--" Then, remembering the gold which Louise had brought to
pay the bill with, Morel cried, "But the money--that money you had this
morning, Louise!" And he gave his daughter a terrible look.

Louise understood it.

"I rob!" she exclaimed; and her cheeks suffused with generous
indignation, her tone and gesture, reassured her father.

"I knew it well enough!" he exclaimed. "You see, M. le Commissaire, she
denies it; and I swear to you, that she never told me a lie in her life;
and everybody that knows her will say the same thing as I do. She lie!
Oh, no, she is too proud to do that! And, then, the bill has been paid
by our benefactor. The gold she does not wish to keep, but will return
it to the person who lent it to her, desiring him not to tell any one;
won't you, Louise?"

"Your daughter is not accused of theft," said the magistrate.

"Well, then, what is the charge against her? I, her father, swear to you
that she is innocent of whatever crime they may accuse her of, and I
never told a lie in my life either."

"Why should you know what she is charged with?" said Rodolph, moved by
his distress. "Louise's innocence will be proved; the person who takes
so great an interest in you will protect your daughter. Come, come!
Courage, courage! This time Providence will not forsake you. Embrace
your daughter, and you will soon see her again."

"M. le Commissaire," cried Morel, not attending to Rodolph, "you are
going to deprive a father of his daughter without even naming the crime
of which she is accused! Let me know all! Louise, why don't you speak?"

"Your daughter is accused of child-murder," said the magistrate.

"I--I--I--child-mur--I don't--you--"

And Morel, aghast, stammered incoherently.

"Your daughter is accused of having killed her child," said the
commissary, deeply touched at this scene; "but it is not yet proved that
she has committed this crime."

"Oh, no, I have not, sir! I have not!" exclaimed Louise, energetically,
and rising; "I swear to you that it was dead. It never breathed,--it was
cold. I lost my senses,--this is my crime. But kill my child! Oh, never,
never!"

"Your child, abandoned girl!" cried Morel, raising his hands towards
Louise, as if he would annihilate her by this gesture and imprecation.

"Pardon, father, pardon!" she exclaimed.

After a moment's fearful silence, Morel resumed, with a calm that was
even more frightful:

"M. le Commissaire, take away that creature; she is not my child!"

The lapidary turned to leave the room; but Louise threw herself at his
knees, around which she clung with both arms; and, with her head thrown
back, distracted and supplicating, she exclaimed:

"Father, hear me! Only hear me!"

"M. le Commissaire, away with her, I beseech you! I leave her to you,"
said the lapidary, struggling to free himself from Louise's embrace.

"Listen to her," said Rodolph, holding him; "do not be so pitiless."

"To her! To her!" repeated Morel, lifting his two hands to his forehead,
"to a dishonoured wretch! A wanton! Oh, a wanton!"

"But, if she were dishonoured through her efforts to save you?" said
Rodolph to him in a low voice.

These words made a sudden and painful impression on Morel, and he cast
his eyes on his weeping child still on her knees before him; then, with
a searching look, impossible to describe, he cried in a hollow voice,
clenching his teeth with rage:

"The notary?"

An answer came to Louise's lips. She was about to speak, but paused,--no
doubt a reflection,--and, bending down her head, remained silent.

"No, no; he sought to imprison me this morning!" continued Morel, with a
violent burst. "Can it be he? Ah, so much the better, so much the
better! She has not even an excuse for her crime; she never thought of
me in her dishonour, and I may curse her without remorse."

"No, no; do not curse me, my father! I will tell you all,--to you alone,
and you will see--you will see whether or not I deserve your
forgiveness."

"For pity's sake, hear her!" said Rodolph to him.

"What will she tell me,--her infamy? That will soon be public, and I can
wait till then."

"Sir," said Louise, addressing the magistrate, "for pity's sake, leave
me alone with my father, that I may say a few words to him before I
leave him, perhaps for ever; and before you, also, our benefactor, I
will speak; but only before you and my father."

"Be it so," said the magistrate.

"Will you be pitiless, and refuse this last consolation to your child?"
asked Rodolph of Morel. "If you think you owe me any gratitude for the
kindness which I have been enabled to show you, consent to your
daughter's entreaties."

After a moment's sad and angry silence, Morel replied:

"I will."

"But where shall we go!" inquired Rodolph; "your family are in the other
room."

"Where shall we go," exclaimed the lapidary, with a bitter irony, "where
shall we go? Up above,--up above, into the garret, by the side of the
body of my dead daughter; that spot will well suit a confession, will it
not? Come along, come, and we will see if Louise will dare to tell a lie
in the presence of her sister's corpse. Come! Come along!"

And Morel went out hastily with a wild air, and turning his face from
Louise.

"Sir," said the commissary to Rodolph, in an undertone, "I beg you for
this poor man's sake not to protract this conversation. You were right
when you said his reason was touched; just now his look was that of a
madman."

"Alas, sir, I am equally fearful with yourself of some fresh and
terrible disaster! I will abridge as much as I can this most painful
farewell."

And Rodolph rejoined the lapidary and his daughter.

However strange and painful Morel's determination might appear, it was
really the only thing that, under the circumstances, could be done. The
magistrate consented to await the issue of this conversation in
Rigolette's chamber; the Morel family were occupying Rodolph's
apartment, and there was only the garret at liberty; and it was into
this horrid retreat that Louise, her father, and Rodolph betook
themselves. Sad and affecting sight!

In the middle of the attic which we have already described, there lay,
stretched on the idiot's mattress, the body of the little girl who had
died in the morning, now covered by a ragged cloth. The unusual and
clear light, reflected through the narrow skylight, threw the figures of
the three actors in this scene into bold relief. Rodolph, standing up,
was leaning with his back against the wall, deeply moved. Morel, seated
at the edge of his working-bench, with his head bent, his hands hanging
listless by his sides, whilst his gaze, fixed and fierce, rested on, and
did not quit, the mattress on which the remains of his poor little Adèle
were deposited. At this spectacle, the anger and indignation of the
lapidary subsided, and were changed to inexpressible bitterness; his
energy left him, and he was utterly prostrated beneath this fresh blow.
Louise, who was ghastly pale, felt her strength forsake her. The
revelation she was about to make terrified her. Still she ventured,
tremblingly, to take her father's hand,--that miserable and shrivelled
hand, withered and wasted by excess of toil. The lapidary did not
withdraw it, and then his daughter, sobbing as if her heart would burst,
covered it with kisses, and felt it slightly pressed against her lips.
Morel's wrath had ended, and then his tears, long repressed, flowed
freely and bitterly.

"Oh, father, if you only knew!" exclaimed Louise; "if you only knew how
much I am to be pitied!"

"Oh, Louise, this, this will be the heaviest bitter in my cup for the
rest of my life,--all my life long," replied the lapidary, weeping
terribly. "You, you in prison,--in the same bench with criminals; you so
proud when you had a right to be proud! No," he resumed in a fresh burst
of grief and despair, "no; I would rather have seen you in your shroud
beside your poor little sister!"

"And I, I would sooner be there!" replied Louise.

"Be silent, unhappy girl, you pain me. I was wrong to say so; I have
been too harsh. Come, speak; but in the name of Heaven, do not lie.
However frightful the truth may be, yet tell it me all; let me learn it
from your lips, and it will be less cruel. Speak, for, alas! our moments
are counted, they are waiting for you down below. Ah, just Heaven, what
a sad, sad parting!"

"My father, I will tell you all,--everything," replied Louise, taking
courage; "but promise me--and our kind benefactor must promise me
also--not to repeat this to any person,--to any person. If he knew that
I had told!--oh," and she shuddered as she spoke, "you would be
destroyed, destroyed as I am; for you know not the power and ferocity of
this man."

"What man?"

"My master!"

"The notary?"

"Yes," said Louise in a whisper, and looking around her as if she feared
to be overheard.

"Take courage," said Rodolph; "no matter how cruel and powerful this man
may be, we will defeat him! Besides, if I reveal what you are about to
tell us, it would only be in the interest of yourself or your father."

"And me too, Louise, if I speak, it would be in endeavouring to save
you. But what has this villain done?"

"This is not all," said Louise, after a moment's reflection; "in this
recital there will be a person implicated who has rendered me a great
service, who has shown the utmost kindness to my father and family; this
person was in the employ of M. Ferrand when I entered his service, and
he made me take an oath not to disclose his name."

Rodolph, believing that she referred to Germain, said to Louise:

"If you mean François Germain, make your mind tranquil, his secret shall
be kept by your father and myself."

Louise looked at Rodolph with surprise.

"Do you know him?" said she.

"What! was the good, excellent young man, who lived here for three
months, employed at the notary's when you went to his service?" said
Morel. "The first time you met him here, you appeared as if you had
never seen him before."

"It was agreed between us, father; he had serious reasons why he did not
wish it known that he was working at M. Ferrand's. It was I who told him
of the room to let on the fourth story here, knowing that he would be a
good neighbour for you."

"But," inquired Rodolph, "who, then, placed your daughter at the
notary's?"

"During the illness of my wife, I said to Madame Burette--the woman who
advanced money on pledges, who lived in this house--that Louise wished
to get into service in order to assist us. Madame Burette knew the
notary's housekeeper, and gave me a letter to her, in which she
recommended Louise as a very good girl. Cursed letter! it was the cause
of all our misfortune. This was the way, sir, that my daughter got into
the notary's service."

"Although I know some of the causes which excited M. Ferrand's hatred
against your father," said Rodolph to Louise, "I beg you to tell me as
shortly as possible what passed between you and the notary after your
entering into his service; it may, perhaps, be useful for your defence."

"When I first went into M. Ferrand's house," said Louise, "I had nothing
to complain of with respect to him. I had a great deal to do, and the
housekeeper often scolded me, and the house was very dull; but I endured
everything very patiently. Service is service, and, perhaps, elsewhere I
should have other disagreeables. M. Ferrand was a very stern-looking
person; he went to mass, and frequently had priests in his house. I did
not at all distrust him; for at first he hardly ever looked at me, spoke
short and cross, especially when there were any strangers. Except the
porter who lived at the entrance, in the same part of the house as the
office is in, I was the only servant, with Madame Séraphin, the
housekeeper. The pavilion that we occupied was isolated between the
court and the garden. My bedroom was high up. I was often afraid, being,
as I was, always alone, either in the kitchen, which is underground, or
in my bedroom. One day I had worked very late mending some things that
were required in a hurry, and then I was going to bed, when I heard
footsteps moving quietly in the little passage at the end of which my
room was situated; some one stopped at my door. At first I supposed it
was the housekeeper; but, as no one entered, I began to be alarmed. I
dared not move, but I listened; however, I heard no one; yet I was sure
that there was some one behind my door. I asked twice who was there, but
no one answered; I then pushed my chest of drawers against the door,
which had neither lock nor bolt. I still listened, but nothing stirred;
so at the end of half an hour, which seemed very long to me, I threw
myself on my bed, and the night passed quietly. The next morning I asked
the housekeeper's leave to have a bolt put on my door, which had no
fastening, telling her of my fright on the previous night, and she told
me I had been dreaming, and that, if I wanted a bolt, I must ask M.
Ferrand for it. When I asked him, he shrugged up his shoulders, and said
I was crazy; so I did not dare say any more about it. Some time after
this, the misfortune about the diamond happened. My father in his
despair did not know what to do. I told Madame Séraphin of his distress,
and she replied; 'Monsieur is so charitable, perhaps he will do
something for your father.' The same afternoon, when I was waiting at
table, M. Ferrand said to me, suddenly, 'Your father is in want of
thirteen hundred francs; go and tell him to come to my office this
evening, and he shall have the money.' At this mark of kindness I burst
into tears, and did not know how to thank him, when he said, with his
usual bluntness, 'Very good, very good; oh, what I do is nothing!' The
same evening, after my work, I came to my father to tell him the good
news; the next day--"

"I had the thirteen hundred francs, giving him my acceptance in blank at
three months' date," said Morel. "I did like Louise, and wept with
gratitude, called this man my benefactor. Oh, what a wretch must he be
thus to destroy the gratitude and veneration I entertained for him!"

"This precaution of making you give him a blank acceptance, at a date
falling due so soon that you could not meet it, must have raised your
suspicion?" said Rodolph.

"No, sir, I only thought the notary took it for security, that was all;
besides, he told me that I need not think about repaying this sum in
less than two years; but that, every three months, the bill should be
renewed for the sake of greater regularity. It was, however, duly
presented here on the day it became due, but, as you may suppose, was
not paid. The usual course of law was followed up, and judgment was
obtained against me in the name of a third party. All this I was desired
not to feel any uneasiness respecting, as it had been caused by an error
on the part of the officer in whose hands the bill had been placed."

"His motive is very evident," said Rodolph; "he wished to have you
entirely in his power."

"Alas, sir, it was from the very day in which he obtained judgment that
he commenced! But, go on, Louise, go on. I scarcely know where I am. My
head seems giddy and bewildered, and at times my memory entirely fails
me. I fear my senses are leaving me, and that I shall become mad. Oh,
this is too much--too hard to bear!"

Rodolph having succeeded in tranquillising the lapidary, Louise thus
proceeded:

"With a view to prove my gratitude to M. Ferrand for all his kindness
towards my family, I redoubled my endeavours to serve him well and
faithfully. From that time the housekeeper appeared to take an utter
aversion to me, and to embrace every opportunity of rendering me
uncomfortable, continually exposing me to anger by withholding from me
the various orders given by M. Ferrand. All this made me extremely
miserable, and I would gladly have sought another place; but the
knowledge of my father's pecuniary obligation to my master prevented my
following my inclinations.

"The money had now been lent about three months, and, though M. Ferrand
still continued harsh and unkind to me in the presence of Madame
Séraphin, he began casting looks of a peculiar and embarrassing
description at me whenever he could do so unobserved, and would smile
and seem amused when he perceived the confusion it occasioned me."

"Take notice, I beg, sir, that it was at this very time the necessary
legal proceedings, for enabling him at any moment to deprive me of my
liberty, were going on."

"One day," said Louise, in continuation, "the housekeeper went out
directly after dinner, contrary to her usual custom; the clerks, none of
whom lived in the house, were dismissed from further duty for the day,
and retired to their respective homes; the porter was sent out on a
message, leaving M. Ferrand and myself alone in the house. I was doing
some needlework Madame Séraphin had given me, and by her orders was
sitting in a small antechamber, from whence I could hear if I was
wanted. After some time the bell of my master's bedroom rang; I went
there immediately, and upon entering found him standing before the fire.
As I approached he turned around suddenly and caught me in his arms.
Alarm and surprise at first deprived me of power to move; but, spite of
his great strength, I at last struggled so successfully, that I managed
to free myself from his grasp, and, running back with all speed to the
room I had just quitted, I hastily shut the door, and held it with all
my force. Unfortunately, the key was on the other side."

"You hear, sir,--you hear," said Morel to Rodolph, "the manner in which
this generous benefactor behaved to the daughter of the man he affected
to serve!"

"At the end of a few minutes," continued Louise, "the door yielded to
the efforts of M. Ferrand. Fortunately, the lamp by which I had been
working was within my reach, and I precipitately extinguished it. The
antechamber was at some distance from his bedchamber, and we were,
therefore, left in utter darkness. At first he called me by name; but,
finding that I did not reply, he exclaimed, in a voice trembling with
rage and passion, 'If you try to escape from me, your father shall go to
prison for the thirteen hundred francs he owes, and is unable to pay.' I
besought him to have pity on me, promised to do all in my power to serve
him faithfully, and with gratitude for all his goodness to my family,
but declared that no consideration on earth should induce me to disgrace
myself or those I belonged to."

"There spoke my Louise," said Morel, "or, rather, as she would have
spoken in her days of proud innocence. How, then, if such were your
sentiments--But go on, go on."

"I was still concealed by the darkness, which I trusted would preserve
me, when I heard the door closed which led from the antechamber, and
which my master had contrived to find by groping along the wall. Thus,
having me wholly in his power, he returned to his chamber for a light,
with which he quickly returned, and then commenced a fresh attack, the
particulars of which, my dearest father, I will not venture to
describe; suffice it, that promises, threats, violence, all were tried;
but anger, fear, and despair armed me with fresh strength, and, while I
continually eluded his grasp, and fled for safety from room to room, his
rage at my determined resistance knew no bounds. In his fury he even
struck me with such frenzied violence as to leave my features streaming
with blood."

"You hear! you hear!" exclaimed the lapidary, raising his clasped hands
towards heaven, "and are crimes like this to go unpunished? Shall such a
monster escape and not pay a heavy penalty for his wickedness?"

"Trust me," said Rodolph, who seemed profoundly meditating on what he
heard, "trust me, this man's time and hour will come. But continue your
painful narration, my poor girl, and shrink not from telling us even its
blackest details."

"The struggle between us had now gone on so long that my strength began
to fail me. I was conscious of my own inability to resist further, when
the porter, who had returned home, rang the bell twice,--the usual
signal when letters arrived and required to be fetched from his hands.
Fearing that, if I did not obey the summons, the porter would bring the
letters himself, M. Ferrand said, 'Go; utter but one word, and to-morrow
sees your father in prison. If you endeavour to quit this house, the
consequences will fall on him; and, as for you, I will take care no one
shall take you into their house, for, without exactly affirming it, I
will contrive to make every one think you have robbed me. Then, should
any person refer to me for your character, I shall speak of you as an
idle, unworthy girl whom I could keep no longer.'

"The following day after this scene, spite of the menaces of my master,
I ran home to complain to my father of the unkind usage I received,
without daring, however, to tell him all. His first desire was for me
to quit the house of M. Ferrand without delay. But, then, a prison
would close upon my poor parent; added to which, my small earnings had
become indispensably necessary to our family since the illness of my
mother, and the bad character promised me by M. Ferrand might possibly
have prevented me from finding another service for a very long time."

"Yes," said Morel, with gloomy bitterness, "we were selfish and cowardly
enough to allow our poor child to return to that accursed roof. Oh, I
spoke truly when I said, 'Want, want, what mean, what degrading acts do
you not force us to commit!'"

"Alas, dear father, did you not try by every possible means to procure
these thirteen hundred francs? And, that being impossible, there was
nothing left but to submit ourselves to our fate."

"Go on, go on; your parents have been your executioners, and we are far
more guilty than yourself of all the fearful consequences!" exclaimed
the lapidary, concealing his face with his hands.

"When I next saw my master," said Louise, "he had resumed the harsh and
severe manner with which he ordinarily treated me. He made not the
slightest reference to the scene I have just related, while his
housekeeper persisted in her accustomed tormenting and unkind behaviour
towards me, giving me scarcely sufficient food to maintain my strength,
and even locking the bread up so that I could not help myself to a
morsel; she would even carry her cruelty so far as to wilfully spoil and
damage the morsels left by herself and M. Ferrand for my repasts, I
always taking my meals after my master and the housekeeper, who
invariably sat down to table together. My nights were as painful as my
days. I durst not indulge in sleep, lest I should be surprised by the
entrance of the notary. I had no means of securing my chamber door, and
the chest of drawers with which I used to fasten myself in had been
taken away, leaving me only a small table, a chair, and my box. With
these articles I barricaded the door as well as I could, and merely lay
down in my clothes, ready to start up at the least noise. Some time
elapsed, however, without my having any further alarm as regarded M.
Ferrand, who seemed to have altogether forgotten me, and seldom bestowed
even a look on me. By degrees my fears died away, and I became almost
persuaded I had nothing more to dread from the persecutions of my
master. One Sunday I had permission to visit my home, and with extreme
delight hastened to announce the happy change that had taken place to my
parents. Oh, how we all rejoiced to think so! Up to that moment, my dear
father, you know all that occurred. What I have still to tell you,"
murmured Louise, as her voice sunk into an inarticulate whisper, "is so
dreadful that I have never dared reveal it."

"I was sure, ah, too sure," cried Morel, with a wildness of manner and
rapidity of utterance which startled and alarmed Rodolph, "that you were
hiding something from me. Too plainly did I perceive, by your pale and
altered countenance, that your mind was burthened with some heavy
secret. Many a time have I said so to your mother; but she, poor thing!
would not listen to me, and even blamed me for making myself
unnecessarily miserable. So you see, that weakly, and selfish to escape
from trouble ourselves, we allowed our poor, helpless child to remain
under this monster's roof. And to what have we reduced our poor girl?
Why, to be classed with the felons and criminals of a prison! See, see
what comes of parents sacrificing their children. And, then, too, be it
remembered--after all--who knows? True, we are poor--very poor, and may
be guilty--yes, yes, quite right, guilty of throwing our daughter into
shame and disgrace. But, then, see how wretched and distressed we were!
Besides, such as we--" Then, as if suddenly striving to collect his
bewildered ideas, Morel struck his forehead, exclaiming, "Alas! I know
not what I say. My brain burns and my senses seem deserting me. A sort
of bewilderment seems to come over me as though I were stupefied with
drink. Alas, alas! I am going mad!" So saying, the unhappy man buried
his face between his hands.

Unwilling that Louise should perceive the extent of his apprehensions as
regarded the agitated state of the lapidary, and how much alarm he felt
at his wild, incoherent language, Rodolph gravely replied:

"You are unjust, Morel; it was not for herself alone, but for her aged
and afflicted parent, her children, and you, that your poor wife dreaded
the consequences of Louise's quitting the notary's house. Accuse no one;
but let all your just anger, your bitter curses, fall on the head that
alone deserves it,--on that hypocritical monster who offered a weak and
helpless girl the alternative of infamy or ruin; perhaps destruction;
perhaps death to those she most tenderly loved,--on the fiend who could
thus abuse the power he held, thus prey upon the tenderest, holiest
feelings of a loving daughter, thus shamelessly outrage every moral and
religious duty. But patience; as I before remarked, Providence
frequently reserves for crimes so black as this a fearful and astounding
retribution."

As Rodolph uttered these words, he spoke with a tone so expressive of
his own conviction of the certain vengeance of Heaven, that Louise gazed
at her preserver with a surprise not unmingled with fear.

"Go on, my poor girl," resumed Rodolph, addressing Louise; "conceal
nothing from us: it is more important than you can be aware that you
should relate the most minute details of your sad story."

Thus encouraged, Louise proceeded:

"I began, therefore, as I told you, to regain my tranquillity, when one
evening both M. Ferrand and his housekeeper went out. They did not dine
at home. I was quite alone in the house. As usual, my allowance of
bread, wine, and water was left for me, and every place carefully
locked. When I had finished my work, I took the food placed for me, and,
having made my meal, I retired to my bedroom, thinking it less dull than
remaining down-stairs by myself. I took care to leave a light in the
hall for my master, as when he dined out no one ever sat up for him.
Once in my chamber, I seated myself and commenced my sewing; but,
contrary to my usual custom, I found the greatest difficulty in keeping
myself awake. A heavy drowsiness seemed to steal over, and a weight like
lead seemed to press on my eyelids. Alas, dear father!" cried Louise,
interrupting herself as though frightened at her own recital, "I feel
sure you will not credit what I am about to say, you will believe I am
uttering falsehoods; and yet, here, over the lifeless body of my poor
little sister, I swear to the truth of each word I speak."

"Explain yourself, my good girl," said Rodolph.

"Indeed, sir," answered Louise, "you ask me to do that I have been
vainly trying to accomplish during the last seven months. In vain have I
racked my brains to endeavour to account for the events of that fatal
night. Sometimes I have almost grown distracted while trying to clear up
this fearful and mysterious occurrence."

"Merciful Heaven!" exclaimed the lapidary, suddenly rousing from one of
those fits of almost apathetic stupor into which he had occasionally
fallen from the very commencement of this narration, "what dreadful
thing is she going to tell us?"

"This lethargic feeling," continued Louise, "so completely overpowered
me, that, unable any longer to resist it, I at length, contrary to my
usual custom, fell asleep upon my chair. This is all I recollect
before--before--Oh, forgive me, father, forgive me! indeed, indeed, I am
not guilty; yet--"

"I believe you--I believe you; but proceed."

"I know not how long I slept; but when I awoke it was to shame and
dishonour, for I found M. Ferrand beside me."

"'Tis false! 'tis false!" screamed the lapidary, in a tone of frenzied
violence. "Confess that you yielded to violence or to the dread of
seeing me dragged to prison, but do not seek to impose on me by
falsehoods such as this."

"Father! father! I call Heaven to witness I am telling you the truth
only."

"I tell you 'tis a base falsehood. Why should the notary have wished to
throw me in prison, since you had freely yielded to his wishes?"

"Yielded! Oh, no, dear father, I would have died first! So deep was my
sleep that it resembled that of death. It may seem to you both
extraordinary and impossible, and I assure you that, up to the present
hour, I myself have never been able to understand it or account for
it--"

"But I can do so at once," said Rodolph, interrupting Louise. "This
crime alone was wanting to complete the heavy calendar of that man's
offences. Accuse not your daughter, Morel, of seeking to deceive you.
Tell me, Louise, when you made your meal, before ascending to your
chamber, did you not remark something peculiar in the taste of the wine
given you to drink? Try and recollect this circumstance."

After reflecting a short time, Louise replied:

"Yes, I do indeed remember," answered she, "that the wine and water left
for me as usual had a somewhat bitter taste; but I did not pay much
attention to it, because the housekeeper would frequently, when
spitefully inclined, amuse herself with throwing salt or pepper into
what I drank."

"But, on the day you were describing, your wine had a bitter taste?"

"It had, sir, but not sufficiently so to prevent my drinking it; and I
attributed it to the wine being turned."

Morel, with fixed eye and haggard look, listened both to the questions
of Rodolph and the answers of Louise without appearing to understand to
what they tended.

"And before falling asleep on your chair, did not your head seem
unusually heavy, and your limbs weary?"

"Oh, yes, sir, I felt a fullness and throbbing in my temples, an icy
coldness seemed to fill my veins, and a feeling of unusual discomfort
oppressed me."

"Wretch, villainous wretch!" exclaimed Rodolph. "Are you aware, Morel,
what this man made your poor child take in her wine?"

The artisan gazed at Rodolph without replying to his question.

"His accomplice, the housekeeper, had mingled in Louise's drink some
sort of stupefying drug, most probably opium, by which means both the
bodily and mental powers of your unfortunate daughter were completely
paralysed for several hours; and when she awoke from this lethargic
state it was to find herself dishonoured and disgraced."

"Ah, now," exclaimed Louise, "my misfortune is explained. You see, dear
father, I am less guilty than you thought me. Father! dear, dear father!
look upon me, bestow one little look of pity and of pardon on your poor
Louise!"

But the glance of the lapidary was fixed and vacant; his honest mind
could not comprehend the idea of so black, so monstrous a crime as that
ascribed to the notary, and he gazed with blank wonder at the words he
heard, as though quite unable to affix any meaning to them. And besides,
during the latter part of the discourse, his intellect became evidently
shaken, his ideas became a shapeless, confused mass of wandering
recollections; a mere chaotic mass of griefs and sorrows possessed his
brain, and he sank into a state of mental prostration, which is to
intellect what darkness is to the sight,--the formidable symptoms of a
weakened brain. After a pause of some length, Morel replied, in a low,
hasty tone:

"Yes, yes; it is bad, very, very bad; cannot be worse!" and then
relapsed into his former apathy; while Rodolph, watching him with pained
attention, perceived that the energy, even of indignation, was becoming
exhausted within the mind of the miserable father, in the same manner as
excess of grief will frequently dry up the relief of tears. Anxious to
put an end as quickly as possible to the present trying scene, Rodolph
said to Louise:

"Proceed, my poor child, and let us have the remainder of this tissue of
horrors."

"Alas, sir! what you have heard is as nothing to that which follows.
When I perceived M. Ferrand by my side I uttered a cry of terror. My
first impulse was to rush from the room, but M. Ferrand forcibly
detained me; and I still felt so weak, so stupefied with the medicine
you speak of as having been mingled in my drink, that I was powerless as
an infant. 'Why do you wish to escape from me now?' inquired M. Ferrand,
with an air of surprise which filled me with dread. 'What fresh caprice
is this? Am I not here by your own free will and consent?' 'Oh, sir!'
exclaimed I, 'this is most shameful and unworthy, to take advantage of
my sleep to work my ruin; but my father shall know all!' Here my master
interrupted me by bursting into loud laughter. 'Upon my word, young
lady,' said he, 'you are very amusing. So you are going to say that I
availed myself of your being asleep to effect your undoing. But who do
you suppose will credit such a falsehood? It is now four in the morning,
and since ten o'clock last night I have been here. You must have slept
long and soundly not to have discovered my presence sooner. Come, come,
no more attempts at shyness, but confess the truth, that I came hither
with your perfect good-will and consent. You must be less capricious or
we shall not keep good friends, I fear. Your father is in my power. You
have no longer any cause to fly me. Be obedient to my wishes and we
shall do very well together; but resist me, and the consequences shall
fall heavily on you, and your family likewise.' 'I will tell my dear
father of your conduct,' sobbed I; 'he will avenge me, and the laws will
punish you.' M. Ferrand looked at me as though at a loss to comprehend
me. 'Why, you have lost your senses,' cried he; 'what, in Heaven's name,
can you tell your father? That you thought proper to invite me to your
bedroom? But, invent any tale you please, you will soon find what sort
of a reception it will meet with. Why, your father will not look at you,
much more believe you.' 'But you know,' cried I, 'you well know, sir, I
gave no permission for your being here. You are well aware you entered
my chamber without my knowledge, and are now here against my will.'
'Against your will! And is it possible you have the effrontery to utter
such a falsehood, to dare insinuate that I have employed force to gain
my ends? Do you wish to be convinced of the folly of such an imputation?
Why, by my orders, Germain, my cashier, returned here last night at ten
o'clock to complete some very important papers, and until one o'clock
this morning he was writing in the chamber directly under yours; would
he not then have been sure to have heard the slightest sound, much less
the repetition of such a struggle as we had together a little while ago,
my saucy little beauty, when you were not quite in as complying a humour
as I found you in last evening? Germain must have heard you during the
stillness of the night had you but called for assistance. Ask him, when
you see him, whether any such sound occurred; he will tell you no, and
that he worked on uninterruptedly during the very hours you are accusing
me of forcibly entering your bedchamber.'"

"Ah!" cried Rodolph, "the villain had evidently taken every precaution
to prevent detection."

"He had, indeed. As for me, sir," continued Louise, "I was so
thunderstruck with horror at these assertions of M. Ferrand, that I knew
not what to reply. Ignorant of my having taken anything to induce sleep,
I felt wholly unable to account for my having slept so unusually heavy
and long. Appearances were strongly against me; what would it avail for
me to publish the dreadful story? No one would believe me innocent. How,
indeed, could I hope or expect they should, when even to myself the
events of that fatal night continued an impenetrable mystery?"

Even Rodolph remained speechless with horror at this fearful revelation
of the diabolical hypocrisy of M. Ferrand.

"Then," said he, after a pause of some minutes, "you never ventured to
inform your father of the infamous treatment you had received?"

"No," answered she, "for I dreaded lest he might suppose I had willingly
listened to the persuasions of my master; and I also feared that, in the
first burst of his indignation, my poor father would forget that not
only his own freedom, but the very existence of his family, depended
upon the pleasure of M. Ferrand."

"And probably," continued Rodolph, desirous if possible to save Louise
the painful confession, "probably, yielding to constraint, and the dread
of endangering the safety of your father and family by a refusal, you
continued to be the victim of this monster's brutality?"

Louise spoke not, but her cast-down eyes, and the deep blushes which
dyed her pale cheek, answered most painfully in the affirmative.

"And was his conduct afterwards less barbarous and unfeeling than
before?"

"Not in the least. And when, by chance, my master had the curé and
vicaire of Bonne Nouvelle to dine with him, the better to avert all
suspicion from himself, he would scold me severely in their presence,
and even beg M. le Curé to admonish me, assuring him that some day or
other I should fall into ruin; that I was a girl of free and bold
manners, and that he could not make me keep my distance with the young
men in his office; that I was an idle, unworthy person, whom he only
kept out of charity and pity for my father, who was an honest man with a
large family, whom he had greatly served and obliged. With the exception
of that part of the statement which referred to my father, the rest was
utterly false. I never, by any chance, saw the clerks belonging to his
office, as it was situated in a building entirely detached from the
house."

"And, when alone with M. Ferrand, how did he account for his treatment
of you before the curé?"

"He assured me he was only jesting. However, the curé believed him, and
reprehended me very severely, saying that a person must be vicious
indeed to go astray in so godly a household, where I had none but the
most holy and religious examples before my eyes. I knew not what answer
to make to this address; I felt my cheeks burn and my eyes involuntarily
cast down. All these indications of shame and confusion were construed
to my disadvantage, until, at length, sick at heart, and weary, and
disgusted, my very life seemed a burden to me, and many times I felt
tempted to destroy myself; but the thoughts of my parents, my poor
brothers and sisters, that my small earnings helped to maintain,
deterred me from ending my sorrows by death. I therefore resigned myself
to my wretched fate, finding one consolation, amidst the degradation of
my lot, in the thought that, at least, I had preserved my father from
the horrors of a prison. But a fresh misfortune overwhelmed me; I became
_enceinte_. I now felt myself lost indeed. A secret presentiment assured
me that, when M. Ferrand became aware of a circumstance which ought, at
least, to have rendered him less harsh and cruel, he would treat me
even more unkindly than before. I was still, however, far from expecting
what afterwards occurred."

At this moment, Morel, recovering from his temporary abstraction, gazed
around him, as though trying to collect his ideas, then, pressing his
hand upon his forehead, looked at his daughter with an inquiring glance,
and said:

"I fancy I have been ill, or something is wrong with my
head--grief--fatigue--tell me, my child--what were you saying just now?
I seem almost unable to recollect."

"When," continued Louise, unheeding her father's look, "when M. Ferrand
discovered that I was likely to become a mother--"

Here the lapidary waved his hand in despairing agony, but Rodolph calmed
him by an imploring look.

"Yes, yes," said Morel, "let me hear all; 'tis fit and right the tale
should be told. Go on, go on, my girl, and I will listen from beginning
to end."

Louise went on. "I besought M. Ferrand to tell me by what means I should
conceal my shame, and the consequence of a crime of which he was the
author. Alas, dear father, I can scarcely hope or believe you will
credit what I am about to tell you."

"What did he say? Speak."

"Interrupting me with much indignation and well-feigned surprise, he
affected not to understand my meaning, and even inquired whether I had
not lost my senses. Terrified, I exclaimed, 'Oh, sir, what is to become
of me? Alas, if you have no pity on me, pity at least the poor infant
that must soon see the light!'

"'What a lost, depraved character!' cried M. Ferrand, raising his
clasped hands towards heaven. 'Horrible, indeed! Why, you poor, wretched
girl, is it possible that you have the audacity to accuse me of
disgracing myself by any illicit acquaintance with a person of your
infamous description? Can it be that you have the hardihood to lay the
fruits of your immoral conduct and gross irregularity at my door,--I,
who have repeated a hundred times, in the presence of respectable
witnesses, that you would come to ruin some day, vile profligate that
you are? Quit my house this instant, or I will drive you out!'"

Rodolph and Morel were struck with horror; a system of wickedness like
this seemed to freeze their blood.

"By Heaven!" said Rodolph, "this surpasses any horrors that imagination
could have conceived."

Morel did not speak, but his eyes expanded fearfully, whilst a
convulsive spasm contracted his features. He quitted the stool on which
he was sitting, opened a drawer suddenly, and, taking out a long and
very sharp file, fixed in a wooden handle, he rushed towards the door.
Rodolph, guessing his thoughts, seized his arm, and stopped his
progress.

"Morel, where are you going? You will do a mischief, unhappy man!"

"Take care," exclaimed the infuriated artisan, struggling, "or I shall
commit two crimes instead of one!" and the madman threatened Rodolph.

"Father, it is our benefactor!" exclaimed Louise.

"He is jesting at us; he wants to save the notary," replied Morel, quite
crazed, and struggling with Rodolph. At the end of a second, the latter
disarmed him, carefully opened the door, and threw the file out on the
staircase. Louise ran to the lapidary, embraced him, and said:

"Father, it is our benefactor! You have raised your hand against
him,--recover yourself."

These words recalled Morel to himself, and hiding his face in his hands,
he fell mutely on his knees before Rodolph.

[Illustration: _Morel fell back on the stool._
Original Etching by Adrian Marcel.]

"Rise, rise, unhappy father," said Rodolph, in accents of great
kindness; "be patient, be patient, I understand your wrath and share
your hatred; but, in the name of your vengeance, do not compromise your
daughter!"

"Louise!--my daughter!" cried the lapidary, rising, "but what can
justice--the law--do against that? We are but poor wretches, and were we
to accuse this rich, powerful, and respected man, we should be laughed
to scorn. Ha! ha! ha!" and he laughed convulsively, "and they would be
right. Where would be our proofs?--yes, our proofs? No one would believe
us. So, I tell you--I tell you," he added, with increased fury, "I tell
you that I have no confidence but in the impartiality of my knife."

"Silence, Morel! your grief distracts you," said Rodolph to him
sorrowfully; "let your daughter speak; the moments are precious; the
magistrate waits; I must know all,--all, I tell you; go on, my child."

Morel fell back on the stool, overwhelmed with his anguish.

"It is useless, sir," continued Louise, "to tell you of my tears, my
prayers. I was thunderstruck. This took place at ten o'clock in the
morning in M. Ferrand's private room. The curate was coming to breakfast
with him, and entered at the moment when my master was assailing me with
reproach and accusations. He appeared much put out at the sight of the
priest."

"What occurred then?"

"Oh, he soon recovered himself, and exclaimed, call him by name, 'Well,
Monsieur l'Abbé, I said so, I said this unhappy girl would be undone.
She is ruined, ruined for ever; she has just confessed to me her fault
and her shame, and entreated me to save her. Only think that, from
commiseration, I have received such a wanton into my house!' 'How,' said
the abbé to me with indignation, 'in spite of the excellent counsels
which your master has given you a hundred times in my presence, have
you really sunk so low? Oh, it is unpardonable! My friend, my friend,
after the kindness you have evinced towards this wretched girl and her
family, any pity would be weakness. Be inexorable,' said the abbé, the
dupe, like the rest of the world, of M. Ferrand's hypocrisy."

"And you did not unmask the scoundrel on the spot?" asked Rodolph.

"Ah, no! monsieur, I was terrified, my head was in a whirl, I did not
dare, I could not pronounce a word,--yet I was anxious to speak and
defend myself. 'But sir--' I cried. 'Not one word more, unworthy
creature,' said M. Ferrand, interrupting me. 'You heard M. l'Abbé. Pity
would be weakness. In an hour you leave my house!' Then, without
allowing me time to reply, he led the abbé into another room. After the
departure of M. Ferrand," resumed Louise, "I was almost bereft of my
senses for a moment. I was driven from his house, and unable to find any
home elsewhere, in consequence of my condition, and the bad character
which my master would give with me. I felt sure, too, that in his rage
he would send my father to prison; and I did not know what to do. I went
to my room, and there I wept bitterly. At the end of two hours M.
Ferrand appeared. 'Is your bundle made up?' said he. 'Pardon,' I
exclaimed, falling at his feet, 'do not turn me from your house in my
present condition. What will become of me? I have no place to turn to.'
'So much the better; this is the way that God punishes loose behaviour
and falsehood.' 'Dare you say that I tell falsehood?' I asked,
indignantly, 'dare you say that it is not you who have caused my ruin?'
'Leave my house this moment, you wretch, since you persist in your
calumnies!' he replied in a terrible voice; 'and to punish you I will
to-morrow send your father to the gaol.' 'Well, no, no!' said I,
terrified; 'I will not again accuse you, sir; that I promise you; but
do not drive me away from the house. Have pity on my father. The little
I earn here helps to support my family. Keep me here; I will say
nothing. I will endeavour to hide every thing; and when I can no longer
do so, oh, then, but not till then, send me away!' After fresh
entreaties on my part, M. Ferrand consented to keep me with him; and I
considered that a great favour in my wretched condition. During the time
that followed this cruel scene, I was most wretched, and miserably
treated; only sometimes M. Germain, whom I seldom saw, kindly asked me
what made me unhappy; but shame prevented me from confessing anything to
him."

"Was not that about the time when he came to reside here?"

"Yes, sir, he was looking out for an apartment near the Rue du Temple or
de l'Arsenal. There was one to let here, and I told him of that one
which you now occupy, sir, and it suited him exactly. When he quitted
it, about two months ago, he begged me not to mention his new address
here, but that they knew it at M. Ferrand's."

The necessity under which Germain was to conceal himself from those who
were trying to find him explained all these precautions to Rodolph.

"And it never occurred to you to make a confidant of Germain?" he said
to Louise.

"No, sir, he was also a dupe to the hypocrisy of M. Ferrand; he called
him harsh and exacting; but he thought him the honestest man on the face
of the earth."

"When Germain was lodging here, did he never hear your father at times
accuse the notary of desiring to seduce you?"

"My father never expressed his fears before strangers; and besides, at
this period, I deceived his uneasiness, and comforted him by the
assurances that M. Ferrand no longer thought of me. Alas! my poor father
will now forgive me those falsehoods? I only employed them to
tranquillise your mind, father dear, that was all."

Morel made no reply; he only leaned his forehead on his two arms,
crossed on his working-board, and sobbed bitterly.

Rodolph made a sign to Louise not to address herself to her father, and
she continued thus:

"I led from this time a life of tears and perpetual anguish. By using
every precaution, I had contrived to conceal my condition from all eyes;
but I could not hope thus to hide it during the last two months. The
future became more and more alarming to me, as M. Ferrand had declared
that he would not keep me any longer in the house; and therefore I
should be deprived of the small resources which assisted our family to
live. Cursed and driven from my home by my father, for, after the
falsehoods I had told him to set his mind at ease, he would believe me
the accomplice, and not the victim of M. Ferrand, what was to become of
me? where could I find refuge or place myself in my condition? I then
had a criminal idea; but, fortunately, I recoiled from putting it into
execution. I confess this to you, sir, because I will not keep any thing
concealed, not even that which may tell against myself; and thus I may
show you the extremities to which I was reduced by the cruelty of M.
Ferrand. If I had given way to such a thought, would he not have been
the accomplice of my crime?"

After a moment's silence, Louise resumed with great effort, and in a
trembling voice:

"I had heard say by the porteress that a quack doctor lived in the
house,--and,--"

She could not finish.

Rodolph recollected that, at his first interview with Madame Pipelet, he
had received from the postman, in her absence, a letter written on
coarse paper, in a feigned hand, and on which he had remarked the traces
of tears.

"And you wrote to him, unhappy girl, three days since? You wept over
your letter; and the handwriting was disguised."

Louise looked at Rodolph in great consternation.

"How did you know that, sir?"

"Do not alarm yourself; I was alone in Madame Pipelet's lodge when they
brought in the letter; and I remarked it quite accidentally."

"Yes, sir, it was mine. In this letter, which bore no signature, I wrote
to M. Bradamanti, saying that, as I did not dare to go to him, I would
beg him to be in the evening near the Château d'Eau. I had lost my
senses. I sought fearful advice from him; and I left my master's house
with the intention of following them; but, at the end of a minute, my
reason returned to me, and I saw what a crime I was about to commit. I
returned to the house, and did not attend the appointment I had written
for. That evening an event occurred, the consequences of which caused
the misfortune which has overwhelmed me. M. Ferrand thought I had gone
out for a couple of hours, whilst, in reality, I had been gone but a
very short time. As I passed before the small garden gate, to my great
surprise I saw it half open. I entered by it, and took the key into M.
Ferrand's private room, where it was usually kept. This apartment was
next to his bedroom, the most retired place in the house; and it was
there he had his private meetings with clients and others, transacting
his every-day business in the office. You will see, sir, why I give you
these particulars. As I very well knew the ways of the apartments, after
having crossed the dining-room, which was lighted up, I entered into the
salon without any candle, and then into the little closet, which was on
this side of his sleeping-room. The door of this latter opened at the
moment when I was putting the key on a table; and the moment my master
saw me by the light of the lamp, which was burning in his chamber, then
he suddenly shut the door on some person whom I could not see, and
then, in spite of the darkness, rushed towards me and, seizing me by the
throat as if he would strangle me, said, in a low voice, and in a tone
at once savage and alarmed, 'What! listening!--spying at the door! What
did you hear? Answer me,--answer directly, or I'll strangle you.' But,
suddenly changing his idea, and not giving me time to say a word, he
drove me back into the dining-room; the office door was open, and he
brutally thrust me in and shut the door."

"And you did not hear the conversation?"

"Not a word, sir; if I had known that there was any one in his room with
him, I should have been careful not to have gone there. He even forbade
Madame Séraphin from doing so."

"And, when you left the office, what did he say to you?"

"It was the housekeeper who let me out, and I did not see M. Ferrand
again that night. His violence to me, and the fright I had undergone,
made me very ill indeed. The next day, at the moment when I went
down-stairs, I met M. Ferrand, and I shuddered when I remembered his
threats of the night before; what then was my surprise when he said to
me calmly, 'You knew that I forbid any one to enter my private room when
I have any person there; but, for the short time longer you will stay
here, it is useless to scold you any more.' And then he went into his
study. This mildness astonished me after his violence of the previous
evening. I went on with my work as usual, and was going to put his
bedchamber to rights. I had suffered a great deal all night, and was
weak and exhausted. Whilst I was hanging up some clothes in a dark
closet at the end of the room near the bed, I was suddenly seized with a
painful giddiness, and felt as if I should lose my senses; as I fell, I
tried to support myself by grasping at a large cloak which hung against
the wainscot; but in my fall I drew this cloak down on me, and was
almost entirely covered by it. When I came to myself, the glass door of
the above closet was shut. I heard M. Ferrand's voice,--he was speaking
aloud. Remembering the scene of the previous evening, I thought I should
be killed if I stirred. I suppose that, hidden by the cloak which had
fallen on me, my master did not perceive me when he shut the door of
this dark wardrobe. If he found me, how could I account for, and make
him believe, this singular accident? I, therefore, held my breath, and
in spite of myself, overheard the conclusion of this conversation which,
no doubt had begun some time."

"And who was the person who was talking with the notary and shut up in
this room with him?" inquired Rodolph of Louise.

"I do not know, sir; I did not recognise the voice."

"And what were they saying?"

"No doubt they had been conversing some time; but all I heard was this:
'Nothing more easy,' said the unknown voice; 'a fellow named Bras Rouge
has put me, for the affair I mentioned to you just now, in connection
with a family of "fresh-water pirates,"[1] established on the point of a
small islet near Asnières. They are the greatest scoundrels on earth;
the father and grandfather were guillotined; two of the sons were
condemned to the galleys for life; but there are still left a mother,
three sons, and two daughters, all as infamous as they can possibly be.
They say that at night, in order to plunder on both sides of the Seine,
they sometimes come down in their boats as low as Bercy. They are
ruffians, who will kill any one for a crown-piece; but we shall not want
their aid further than their hospitality for your lady from the country.
The Martials--that is the name of these pirates--will pass in her eyes
for an honest family of fishers. I will go, as if from you, to pay two
or three visits to your young lady. I will order her a few comforting
draughts; and at the end of a week or ten days, she will form an
acquaintance with the burial-ground of Asnières. In villages, deaths are
looked on as nothing more than a letter by the post, whilst in Paris
they are a little more curious in such matters. But when do you send
your young lady from the provinces to the isle of Asnières, for I must
give the Martials notice of the part they have to play?' 'She will
arrive here to-morrow, and next day I shall send her to them,' replied
M. Ferrand; 'and I shall tell her that Doctor Vincent will pay her a
visit at my request.' 'Ah, Vincent will do as well as any other name,'
said the voice."

  [1] We shall hear more particulars of these worthies in another
  chapter.

"What new mystery of crime and infamy?" said Rodolph, with increased
astonishment.

"New? No, sir, you will see that it is in connection with another crime
that you know of," resumed Louise, who thus continued: "I heard a
movement of chairs,--the interview had ended. 'I do not ask the secret
of you,' said M. Ferrand, 'you behave to me as I behave to you.' 'Thus
we may mutually serve without any power mutually to injure each other,'
answered the voice. 'Observe my zeal! I received your letter at ten
o'clock last night, and here I am this morning. Good-by, accomplice; do
not forget the isle of Asnières, the fisher Martial, and Doctor Vincent.
Thanks to these three magic words, your country damsel has only eight
days to look forward to.' 'Wait,' said M. Ferrand, 'whilst I go and undo
the safety-bolt, which I have drawn to in my closet, and let me look out
and see that there is no one in the antechamber, in order that you may
go out by the side path in the garden by which you entered.' M. Ferrand
went out for a moment, and then returned; and I heard him go away with
the person whose voice I did not know. You may imagine my fright, sir,
during this conversation, and my despair at having unintentionally
discovered such a secret. Two hours after this conversation, Madame
Séraphin came to me in my room, whither I had gone, trembling all over,
and worse than I had been yet. 'My master is inquiring for you,' said
she to me; 'you are better off than you deserve to be. Come, go
down-stairs. You are very pale; but what you are going to hear will give
you a colour.' I followed Madame Séraphin, and found M. Ferrand in his
private study. When I saw him, I shuddered in spite of myself, and yet
he did not look so disagreeable as usual. He looked at me steadfastly
for some time, as if he would read the bottom of my thoughts. I lowered
my eyes. 'You seem very ill?' he said. 'Yes, sir,' I replied, much
surprised at being thus addressed. 'It is easily accounted for,' added
he; 'it is the result of your condition and the efforts you make to
conceal it; but, in spite of your falsehoods, your bad conduct, and your
indiscretion yesterday,' he added, in a milder tone, 'I feel pity for
you. A few days more, and it will be impossible to conceal your
situation. Although I have treated you as you deserve before the curate
of the parish, such an event in the eyes of the world will be the
disgrace of a house like mine; and, moreover, your family will be deeply
distressed. Under these circumstances I will come to your aid.' 'Ah!
sir,' I cried, 'such kind words from you make me forget everything.'
'Forget what?' asked he, hastily. 'Nothing,--nothing,--forgive me, sir!'
I replied, fearful of irritating him, and believing him kindly disposed
towards me. 'Then attend to me,' said he; 'you will go to see your
father to-day, and tell him that I am going to send you into the country
for two or three months, to take care of a house which I have just
bought. During your absence I will send your wages to him. To-morrow you
will leave Paris. I will give you a letter of introduction to Madame
Martial, the mother of an honest family of fishers, who live near
Asnières. You will say you came from the country and nothing more. You
will learn hereafter my motive for this introduction, which is for your
good. Madame Martial will treat you as one of the family, and a medical
man of my acquaintance, Dr. Vincent, will give you all you require in
your situation. You see how kind I am to you!'"

"What a horrible snare!" exclaimed Rodolph; "I see it all now. Believing
that overnight you had listened to some secret, no doubt very important
for him, he desired to get rid of you. He had probably an interest in
deceiving his accomplice by describing you as a female from the country.
What must have been your alarm at this proposal?"

"It was like a violent blow; it quite bereft me of sense. I could not
reply, but looked at M. Ferrand aghast; my head began to wander. I
should, perhaps, have risked my life by telling him that I had overheard
his projects in the morning, when fortunately I recollected the fresh
perils to which such an avowal would expose me. 'You do not understand
me, then?' he said, impatiently. 'Yes, sir,--but,' I added, all
trembling, 'I should prefer not going into the country.' 'Why not? You
will be taken every care of where I send you.' 'No, no, I will not go; I
would rather remain in Paris, and not go away from my family; I would
rather confess all to them, and die with them, if it must be so.' 'You
refuse me, then?' said M. Ferrand, repressing his rage, and looking
fixedly at me. 'Why have you so suddenly changed your mind? Not a minute
ago you accepted my offer.' I saw that if he guessed my motive I was
lost, so I replied that I did not then think that he desired me to leave
Paris and my family. 'But you dishonour your family, you wretched girl!'
he exclaimed, and unable any longer to restrain himself, he seized me by
the arms, and shook me so violently that I fell. 'I will give you until
the day after to-morrow,' he cried, 'and then you shall go from here to
the Martials, or go and inform your father that I have turned you out of
my house, and will send him to gaol to-morrow.' He then left me,
stretched on the floor, whence I had not the power to rise. Madame
Séraphin had run in when she heard her master raise his voice so loud,
and with her assistance, and staggering at every step, I regained my
chamber, where I threw myself on my bed, and remained until night, so
entirely was I prostrated by all that had happened. By the pains that
came on about one o'clock in the morning, I felt assured that I should
be prematurely a mother."

"Why did you not summon assistance?"

"Oh, I did not dare. M. Ferrand was anxious to get rid of me, and he
would certainly have sent for Dr. Vincent, who would have killed me at
my master's instead of killing me at the Martials, or else M. Ferrand
would have stifled me, and said that I had died in my confinement. Alas,
sir, perhaps these were vain terrors, but they came over me at this
moment and caused my suffering; otherwise I would have endured the
shame, and should never have been accused of killing my child. Instead
of calling for help, and for fear my cries should be heard, I stuffed my
mouth full with the bedclothes. At length, after dreadful anguish,
alone, in the midst of darkness, the child was born, and,--dead,--I did
not kill it!--indeed, I did not kill it,--ah, no! In the midst of this
fearful night I had one moment of bitter joy, and that was when I
pressed my child in my arms."

And the voice of Louise was stifled with sobs.

Morel had listened to his daughter's recital with a mournful apathy and
indifference which alarmed Rodolph. However, seeing her burst into
tears, the lapidary, who was still leaning on his work-board with his
two hands pressed against his temples, looked at Louise steadfastly, and
said:

"She weeps,--she weeps,--why is she weeping?" Then, after a moment's
hesitation, "Ah, yes,--I know, I know,--the notary,--isn't it? Go on my
poor Louise,--you are my daughter,--I love you still,--just now I did
not recognise you,--my eyes were darkened with my tears,--oh, my
head,--how badly it aches,--my head, my head!"

"You do not believe me guilty, do you, father, do you?"

"Oh, no, no!"

"It is a terrible misfortune; but I was so fearful of the notary."

"The notary? Ah, yes, and well you might be; he is so wicked, so very
wicked!"

"But you will forgive me now?"

"Yes, yes."

"Really and truly?"

"Yes--ah, yes! Ah! I love you the same as ever,--although I cannot--not
say--you see--because--oh, my head, my head!"

Louise looked at Rodolph in extreme alarm.

"He is suffering deeply; but let him calm himself. Go on."

Louise, after looking twice or thrice at Morel with great disquietude,
thus resumed:

"I clasped my infant to my breast, and was astonished at not hearing it
breathe. I said to myself, 'The breathing of a baby is so faint that it
is difficult to hear it.' But then it was so cold. I had no light, for
they never would leave one with me. I waited until the dawn came, trying
to keep it warm as well as I could; but it seemed to me colder and
colder. I said to myself then; 'It freezes so hard that it must be the
cold that chills it so.' At daybreak I carried my child to the window
and looked at it; it was stiff and cold. I placed my mouth to its mouth,
to try and feel its breath. I put my hand on its heart; but it did not
beat; it was dead."

And Louise burst into tears.

"Oh! at this moment," she continued, "something passed within me which
it is impossible to describe. I only remember confusedly what
followed,--it was like a dream,--it was at once despair, terror, rage,
and above all, I was seized with another fear; I no longer feared M.
Ferrand would strangle me, but I feared that, if they found my child
dead by my side, I should be accused of having killed it. Then I had but
one thought, and that was to conceal the corpse from everybody's sight;
and then my dishonour would not be known, and I should no longer have to
dread my father's anger. I should escape from M. Ferrand's vengeance,
because I could now leave his house, obtain another situation, and gain
something to help and support my family. Alas! sir, such were the
reasons which induced me not to say any thing, but try and hide my
child's remains from all eyes. I was wrong, I know; but, in the
situation in which I was, oppressed on all sides, worn out by suffering,
and almost mad, I did not consider to what I exposed myself if I should
be discovered."

"What torture! what torture!" said Rodolph with deep sympathy.

"The day was advancing," continued Louise, "and I had but a few moments
before me until the household would be stirring. I hesitated no longer,
but, wrapping up the unhappy babe as well as I could, I descended the
staircase silently, and went to the bottom of the garden to try and make
a hole in the ground to bury it; but it had frozen so hard in the night
that I could not dig up the earth. So I concealed the body in the bottom
of a sort of cellar, into which no one entered during the winter, and
then I covered it up with an empty box which had held flowers, and
returned to my apartment, without any person having seen me. Of all I
tell you, sir, I have but a very confused recollection. Weak as I was,
it is inexplicable to me how I had strength and courage to do all I did.
At nine o'clock Madame Séraphin came to inquire why I had not risen. I
told her that I was so very ill, and prayed of her to allow me to remain
in bed during the day, and that on the following day I should quit the
house, as M. Ferrand had dismissed me. At the end of an hour's time, he
came himself. 'You are worse to-day. Ah! that is the consequence of your
obstinacy,' said he; 'if you had taken advantage of my kind offer, you
would to-day have been comfortably settled with some worthy people, who
would have taken every care of you; but I will not be so cruel as to
leave you without help in your present situation; and this evening
Doctor Vincent shall come and see you.' At this threat I shuddered; but
I replied to M. Ferrand that I was wrong to refuse his offers the
evening before, and that I would now accept them; but that, being too
ill to move then, I could not go until the day after the next to the
Martials, and that it was useless to send for Doctor Vincent. I only
sought to gain time, for I had made up my mind to leave the house, and
go the next day to my father, whom I hoped to keep in ignorance of all.
Relying on my promise, M. Ferrand was almost kind to me, and, for the
first time in his life, recommended Madame Séraphin to take care of me.
I passed the day in mental agony, trembling every instant lest the body
of my child should be accidentally discovered. I was only anxious that
the frost should break up, so that, the ground not being so hard, I
might be able to dig it up. The snow began to fall, and that gave me
some hopes. I remained all day in bed, and when the night came, I waited
until every one should be asleep, and then I summoned strength enough to
rise and go to the wood-closet, where I found a chopper, with which I
hoped to dig a hole in the ground which was covered with snow. After
immense trouble I succeeded, and then, taking the body, I wept bitterly
over it, and buried it as well as I could in the little box that had
held flowers. I did not know the prayer for the dead; but I said a Pater
and an Ave, and prayed to the good God to receive it into Paradise. I
thought my courage would fail me when I was covering the mould over the
sort of bier I had made. A mother burying her own child! At length I
completed my task, and ah, what it cost me! I covered the place all over
with snow, that it might conceal every trace of what I had done. The
moon had lighted me; yet, when all was done, I could hardly resolve to
go away. Poor little innocent!--in the icy ground,--beneath the snow!
Although it was dead, yet I still seemed to fear that it must feel the
cold. At length I returned to my chamber; and when I got into bed I was
in a violent fever. In the morning M. Ferrand sent to know how I found
myself. I replied that I was a little better, and that I felt sure I
should be strong enough to go next day into the country. I remained the
whole of the day in bed, hoping to acquire a little strength, and in the
evening I arose and went down into the kitchen to warm myself. I was
then quite alone, and then went out into the garden to to say a last
prayer. As I went up to my room I met M. Germain on the landing-place of
the study in which he wrote sometimes, looking very pale. He said to me
hastily, placing a rouleau of money in my hand, 'They are going to
arrest your father to-morrow morning for an over-due bill of thirteen
hundred francs; he is unable to pay it; but here is the money. As soon
as it is light, run to him. It was only to-day that I found out what
sort of a man M. Ferrand is; and he is a villain. I will unmask him.
Above all, do not say that you have the money from me.'

"M. Germain did not even give me time to thank him, but ran quickly
down-stairs. This morning," continued Louise, "before any one had risen
at M. Ferrand's, I came here with the money which M. Germain had given
me to save my father; but it was not enough, and but for your
generosity, I could not have rescued him from the bailiff's hands.
Probably, after I had left, they went into my room and, having
suspicions, have now sent to arrest me. One last service, sir," said
Louise, taking the rouleau of gold from her pocket, "will you give back
this money to M. Germain; I had promised him not to say to any one that
he was employed at M. Ferrand's; but, since you know it, I have not
broken my confidence. Now, sir, I repeat to you before God, who hears
me, that I have not said a word that is not quite true; I have not tried
to hide my faults, and--"

But, suddenly interrupting herself, Louise exclaimed with alarm:

"Sir, sir, look at my father! what can be the matter with him?"

Morel had heard the latter part of this narration with a dull
indifference, which Rodolph had accounted for by attributing it to the
heavy additional misfortune which had occurred to him. After such
violent and repeated shocks, his tears must have dried up, his
sensibility have become lost; he had not even the strength left to feel
anger, as Rodolph thought; but Rodolph was mistaken. As the flame of a
candle which is nearly extinguished dies away and recovers, so Morel's
reason, already much shaken, wavered for some time, throwing out now and
then some small rays of intelligence, and then suddenly all was
darkness.

Absolutely unconscious of what was said or passing around him, for some
time the lapidary had become quite insane. Although his hand-wheel was
placed on the other side of his working-table, and he had not in his
hands either stones or tools, yet the occupied artisan was feigning the
operations of his daily labour, and affecting to use his implements. He
accompanied this pantomime with a sort of noise with his tongue against
the roof of his mouth, in imitation of the noise of his lathe in its
rotatory motions.

"But, sir," said Louise again, with increasing fright, "look, pray look
at my father!"

Then, approaching the artisan, she said to him:

"Father! father!"

Morel gazed on his daughter with that troubled, vague, distracted,
wandering look which characterises the insane, and without discontinuing
his assumed labour, he replied, in a low and melancholy tone:

"I owe the notary thirteen hundred francs; it is the price of Louise's
blood,--so I must work, work, work!--oh, I'll pay, I'll pay, I'll pay!"

"Can it be possible? This cannot be,--he is not mad,--no, no!" exclaimed
Louise, in a heart-rending voice. "He will recover,--it is but a
momentary fit of absence!"

"Morel, my good fellow," said Rodolph to him, "we are here. Your
daughter is near you,--she is innocent."

"Thirteen hundred francs!" said the lapidary, not attending to Rodolph,
but going on with his sham employment.

"My father!" exclaimed Louise, throwing herself at his feet, and
clasping his hands in her own, in spite of his resistance, "it is I--it
is your Louise!"

"Thirteen hundred francs," he repeated, wresting his hands from the
grasp of his daughter. "Thirteen hundred francs,--and if not," he added,
in a low and as it were, confidential tone, "and if not, Louise is to be
guillotined."

And again he imitated the turning of his lathe.

Louise gave a piercing shriek.

"He is mad!" she exclaimed, "he is mad! and it is I--it is I who am the
cause! Oh! Yet it is not my fault,--I did not desire to do ill,--it was
that monster."

"Courage, courage, my poor girl," said Rodolph, "let us hope that this
attack is but momentary. Your father has suffered so much; so many
troubles, all at once, were more than he could bear. His reason wanders
for a moment; it will soon be restored."

"But my mother, my grandmother, my sisters, my brothers, what will
become of them all?" exclaimed Louise, "Now they are deprived of my
father and myself, they must die of hunger, misery and despair!"

"Am I not here?--make your mind, easy; they shall want for nothing.
Courage, I say to you. Your disclosure will bring about the punishment
of a great criminal. You have convinced me of your innocence, and I have
no doubt but that it will be discovered and proclaimed."

"Ah, sir, you see,--dishonour, madness, death,--see the miseries which
that man causes, and yet no one can do any thing against him! Nothing!
The very thought completes all my wretchedness."

"So far from that, let the contrary thought help to support you."

"What mean you, sir?"

"Take with you the assurance that your father, yourself, and your family
shall be avenged."

"Avenged!"

"Yes, that I swear to you," replied Rodolph, solemnly; "I swear to you
that his crimes shall be exposed, and this man shall bitterly expiate
the dishonour, madness, and death which he has caused. If the laws are
powerless to reach him, if his cunning and skill equal his misdeeds,
then his cunning must be met by cunning, his skill must be counteracted
by skill, his misdeeds faced by other misdeeds, but which shall be to
his but a just and avenging retribution, inflicted on a guilty wretch by
an inexorable hand, when compared to a cowardly and base murder."

"Ah, sir, may Heaven hear you! It is no longer myself whom I seek to
avenge, but a poor, distracted father,--my child killed in its birth--"

Then, trying another effort to turn Morel from his insanity, Louise
again exclaimed:

"Adieu, father! They are going to lead me to prison, and I shall never
see you again. It is your poor Louise who bids you adieu. My father! my
father! my father!"

To this distressing appeal there was no response. In that poor,
destroyed mind there was no echo,--none. The paternal cords, always the
last broken, no longer vibrated.

       *       *       *       *       *

The door of the garret opened; the commissary entered.

"My moments are numbered, sir," said he to Rodolph. "I declare to you
with much regret that I cannot allow this conversation to be protracted
any longer."

"This conversation is ended, sir," replied Rodolph, bitterly, and
pointing to the lapidary. "Louise has nothing more to say to her
father,--he has nothing more to hear from his daughter,--he is a
lunatic."

"I feared as much. It is really frightful!" exclaimed the magistrate.

And approaching the workman hastily, after a minute's scrutiny, he was
convinced of the sad reality.

"Ah, sir," said he sorrowfully to Rodolph, "I had already expressed my
sincerest wishes that the innocence of this young girl might be
discovered; but after such a misfortune I will not confine myself to
good wishes,--no,--no! I will speak of this honest and distressed
family; I will speak of this fearful and last blow which has overwhelmed
it; and do not doubt but that the judges will have an additional motive
to find the accused innocent."

"Thanks, thanks, sir!" said Rodolph; "by acting thus it will not be a
mere duty that you fulfil, but a holy office which you undertake."

"Believe me, sir, our duty is always such a painful one that it is most
grateful to us to be interested in any thing which is worthy and good."

"One word more, sir. The disclosures of Louise Morel have fully
convinced me of her innocence. Will you be so kind as inform me how her
pretended crime was discovered, or rather denounced?"

"This morning," said the magistrate, "a housekeeper in the service of M.
Ferrand, the notary, came and deposed before me that, after the hasty
departure of Louise Morel, whom she knew to be seven months advanced in
the family way, she went into the young girl's apartment, and was
convinced that she had been prematurely confined; footsteps had been
traced in the snow, which had led to the detection of the body of a
new-born child buried in the garden. After this declaration I went
myself to the Rue du Sentier, and found M. Jacques Ferrand most
indignant that such a scandalous affair should have happened in his
house. The curé of the church Bonne Nouvelle, whom he had sent for, also
declared to me that Louise Morel had owned her fault in his presence one
day, when, on this account, she was imploring the indulgence and pity of
her master; that, besides, he had often heard M. Ferrand give Louise
Morel the most serious warnings, telling her that, sooner or later, she
would be lost,--'a prediction,' added the abbé, 'which has been
unfortunately fulfilled.' The indignation of M. Ferrand," continued the
magistrate, "seemed to me so just and natural, that I shared in it. He
told me that, no doubt, Louise Morel had taken refuge with her father. I
came hither instantly, for the crime being flagrant, I was empowered to
proceed by immediate apprehension."

Rodolph with difficulty restrained himself when he heard of the
indignation of M. Ferrand, and said to the magistrate:

"I thank you a thousand times, sir, for your kindness, and the support
you promise Louise. I will take care that this poor man, as well as his
wife's mother, are sent to a lunatic asylum."

Then, addressing Louise, who was still kneeling close to her father,
endeavouring, but vainly, to recall him to his senses:

"Make up your mind, my poor girl, to go without taking leave of your
mother,--spare her the pain of such a parting. Be assured that she shall
be taken care of, and nothing shall in future be wanting to your family,
for a woman shall be found who will take care of your mother and occupy
herself with your brothers, and sisters, under the superintendence of
your kind neighbour, Mlle. Rigolette. As for your father, nothing shall
be spared to make his return to reason as rapid as it is complete.
Courage! Believe me, honest people are often severely tried by
misfortune, but they always come out of these struggles more pure, more
strong, and more respected."

       *       *       *       *       *

Two hours after the apprehension of Louise, the lapidary and the old
idiot mother were, by Rodolph's orders, taken to the Bicêtre by David,
where they were to be kept in private rooms and to receive particular
care. Morel left the house in the Rue du Temple without resistance;
indifferent as he was, he went wherever they led him,--his lunacy was
gentle, inoffensive, and melancholy. The grandmother was hungry, and
when they showed her bread and meat she followed the bread and meat. The
jewels of the lapidary, entrusted to his wife, were the same day given
to Madame Mathieu (the jewel-matcher), who fetched them. Unfortunately
she was watched and followed by Tortillard, who knew the value of the
pretended false stones in consequence of the conversation he had
overheard during the time Morel was arrested by the bailiffs. The son of
Bras Rouge discovered that she lived, Boulevard Saint-Denis, No. 11.

Rigolette apprised Madeleine Morel, with considerable delicacy, of the
fit of lunacy which had attacked the lapidary, and of Louise's
imprisonment. At first, Madeleine wept bitterly, and uttered terrible
shrieks; then, the first burst of her grief over, the poor creature,
weak and overcome, consoled herself as well as she could by seeing that
she and her children were surrounded by the many comforts which she owed
to the generosity of their benefactor.

As to Rodolph, his thoughts were very poignant when he considered the
disclosures of Louise. "Nothing is more common," he said, "than this
corrupting of the female servant by the master, either by consent or
against it; sometimes by terror and surprise, sometimes by the imperious
nature of those relations which create servitude. This depravity,
descending from the rich to the poor, despising (in its selfish desire)
the sanctity of the domestic hearth,--this depravity, still most
deplorable when it is voluntarily submitted to, becomes hideous,
frightful, when it is satisfied with violence. It is an impure and
brutal slavery, an ignoble and barbarous tyranny over a fellow-creature,
who in her fright replies to the solicitations of her master by her
tears, and to his declarations with a shudder of fear and disgust. And
then," continued Rodolph, "what is the consequence to the female? Almost
invariably there follow degradation, misery, prostitution, theft, and
sometimes infanticide! And yet the laws are, as yet, strangers to this
crime! Every accomplice of a crime has the punishment of that crime;
every receiver is considered as guilty as the thief. That is justice.
But when a man wantonly seduces a young, innocent, and pure girl,
renders her a mother, abandons her, leaving her but shame, disgrace,
despair, and driving her, perchance, to infanticide, a crime for which
she forfeits her life, is this man considered as her accomplice? Pooh!
What, then, follows? Oh, 'tis nothing,--nothing but a little
love-affair! the whim of the day for a pair of bright eyes. Then she is
left, and he looks out for the next. Still more, it is just possible
that the man may be of an original, an inquisitive turn, perhaps, at
the same time, an excellent brother and son, and may go to the bar of
the criminal court and see his paramour tried for her life! If by chance
he should be subpoenaed as a witness, he may amuse himself by saying
to the persons desirous of having the poor girl executed as soon as
possible, for the greater edification of the public morals, 'I have
something important to disclose to justice.' 'Speak!' 'Gentlemen of the
jury,--This unhappy female was pure and virtuous, it is true. I seduced
her,--that is equally true; she bore me a child,--that is also true.
After that, as she has a light complexion, I completely forsook her for
a pretty brunette,--that is still more true; but, in doing so, I have
only followed out an imprescriptible right, a sacred right which society
recognizes and accords to me.' 'The truth is, this young man is
perfectly in the right,' the jury would say one to another; 'there is no
law which prevents a young man from seducing a fair girl, and then
forsaking her for a brunette; he is a gay young chap, and that's all.'
'Now, gentlemen of the jury, this unhappy girl is said to have killed
her child,--I will say our child,--because I abandoned her; because,
finding herself alone and in the deepest misery, she became frightened,
and lost her senses! And wherefore? Because having, as she says, to
bring up and feed her child, it was impossible that she could continue
to work regularly at her occupation, and gain a livelihood for herself
and this pledge of our love! But I think these reasons quite unworthy of
consideration, allow me to say, gentlemen of the jury. Could she not
have gone to the Lying-in Hospital, if there was room for her? Could she
not, at the critical moment, have gone to the magistrate of her district
and made a declaration of her shame, so that she might have had
authority for placing her child in the Enfants Trouvés? In fact, could
she not, whilst I was playing billiards at the coffee-house, whilst
awaiting my other mistress, could she not have extricated herself from
this affair by some genteeler mode than this? For, gentlemen of the
jury, I will admit that I consider this way of disposing of the pledge
of our loves as rather too unceremonious and rude, under the idea of
thus quietly escaping all future care and trouble. What, is it enough
for a young girl to lose her character, brave contempt, infamy, and have
an illegitimate child? No; but she must also educate the child, take
care of it, bring it up, give it a business, and make an honest man of
it, if it be a boy, like its father; or an honest girl, who does not
turn wanton like her mother. For, really, maternity has its sacred
duties, and the wretches who trample them under foot are unnatural
mothers, who deserve an exemplary and notable punishment; as a proof of
which, gentlemen of the jury, I beg you will unhesitatingly hand over
this miserable woman to the executioner, and you will thus do your duty
like independent, firm, and enlightened citizens. _Dixi!_' 'This
gentleman looks at the question in a very moral point of view,' will say
some hatmaker or retired furrier, who is foreman of the jury; 'he has
done, i'faith, what we should all have done in his place; for the girl
is very pretty, though rather pallid in complexion. This gay spark, as
the song says:

      "'"Has kissed and has prattled with fifty fair maids,
           And changed them as oft, do you see;"

and there is no law against that. As to this unfortunate girl, after
all, it is her own fault! Why did she not repulse him? Then she would
not have committed a crime,--a monstrous crime! which really puts all
society to the blush.' And the hatter or the furrier would be
right,--perfectly right. What is there to criminate this gentleman? Of
what complicity, direct or indirect, moral or material, can he be
charged? This lucky rogue has seduced a pretty girl, and he it is who
has brought her there; he does not deny it; where is the law that
prevents or punishes him? Society merely says: There are gay young
fellows abroad,--let the pretty girls beware! But if a poor wretch,
through want or stupidity, constraint, or ignorance of the laws which he
cannot read, buys knowingly a rag which has been stolen, he will be sent
to the galleys for twenty years as a receiver, if such be the punishment
for the theft itself. This is logical, powerful reasoning,--'Without
receivers there would be no thieves, without thieves there would be no
receivers.' No, no more pity, then--even less pity--for him who excites
to the evil than he who perpetrates it. Let the smallest degree of
complicity be visited with terrible punishment! Good; there is in that a
serious and fertile thought, high and moral. We should bow before
Society which had dictated such a law; but we remember that this
Society, so inexorable towards the smallest complicity of crime against
things, is so framed that a simple and ingenuous man, who should try to
prove that there is at least moral similarity, material complicity,
between the fickle seducer and the seduced and forsaken girl, would be
laughed at as a visionary. And if this simple man were to assert that
without a father there would, in all probability, not be offspring,
Society would exclaim against the atrocity,--the folly! And it would be
right,--quite right; for, after all, this gay youth who might say these
fine things to the jury, however little he might like tragic emotions,
might yet go tranquilly to see his mistress executed,--executed for
child-murder, a crime to which he was an accessory; nay more, the
author, in consequence of his shameless abandonment! Does not this
charming protection, granted to the male portion of society for certain
gay doings suggested by the god of Love, show plainly that France still
sacrifices to the Graces, and is still the most gallant nation in the
world?"




CHAPTER III.

JACQUES FERRAND.


At the period when the events were passing which we are now relating, at
one end of the Rue du Sentier a long old wall extended, covered with a
coat of whitewash, and the top garnished with a row of broken
flint-glass bottles; this wall, bounding on one side the garden of
Jacques Ferrand, the notary, terminated with a _corps de logis_ facing
the street, only one story high, with garrets. Two large escutcheons of
gilt copper, emblems of the notarial residence, flanked the worm-eaten
_porte cochère_, of which the primitive colour was no longer to be
distinguished under the mud which covered it. This entrance led to an
open passage; on the right was the lodge of an old porter, almost deaf,
who was to the body of tailors what M. Pipelet was to the body of
boot-makers; on the left a stable, used as a cellar, washhouse,
woodhouse, and the establishment of a rising colony of rabbits belonging
to the porter, who was dissipating the sorrows of a recent widowhood by
bringing up these domestic animals. Beside the lodge was the opening of
a twisting staircase, narrow and dark, leading to the office, as was
announced to the clients by a hand painted black, whose forefinger was
directed towards these words, also painted in black upon the wall, "The
Office on the first floor."

On one side of a large paved court, overgrown with grass, were empty
stables; on the other side, a rusty iron gate, which shut in the garden;
at the bottom the pavilion, inhabited only by the notary. A flight of
eight or ten steps of disjointed stones, which were moss-grown and
time-worn, led to this square pavilion, consisting of a kitchen and
other underground offices, a ground floor, a first floor, and the top
rooms, in one of which Louise had slept. The pavilion also appeared in a
state of great dilapidation. There were deep chinks in the walls; the
window-frames and outside blinds, once painted gray, had become almost
black by time; the six windows on the first floor, looking out into the
courtyard, had no curtains; a sort of greasy and opaque deposit covered
the glass; on the ground floor there were visible through the
window-panes more transparent, faded yellow cotton curtains, with red
bindings.

On the garden side the pavilion had only four windows. The garden,
overgrown with parasitical plants, seemed wholly neglected. There was no
flower border, not a bush; a clump of elms; five or six large green
trees; some acacias and elder-trees; a yellowish grass-plat, half
destroyed by moss and the scorch of the sun; muddy paths, choked up with
weeds; at the bottom, a sort of half cellar; for horizon, the high,
naked, gray walls of the adjacent houses, having here and there
skylights barred like prison windows,--such was the miserable appearance
of the garden and dwelling of the notary.

To this appearance, or rather reality, M. Ferrand attached great
importance. In the eyes of the vulgar, carelessness about comfort almost
always passes for disinterestedness; dirt, for austerity. Comparing the
vast financial luxury of some notaries, or the costly toilets of their
wives, to the dull abode of M. Ferrand, so opposed to elegance, expense,
or splendour, clients felt a sort of respect for, or rather blind
confidence in, a man who, according to his large practice and the
fortune attributed to him, could say, like many of his professional
brethren, my carriage, my evening party, my country-house, my box at
the opera, etc. But, far from this, Jacques Ferrand lived with rigid
economy; and thus deposits, investments, powers of attorney, in fact,
all matters of trust and business requiring the most scrupulous and
recognised integrity, accumulated in his hands.

Living thus meanly as he did, the notary lived in the way he liked. He
detested the world, show, dearly purchased pleasures; and, even had it
been otherwise, he would unhesitatingly have sacrificed his dearest
inclinations to the appearances which he found it so profitable to
assume.

A word or two on the character of the man. He was one of the children of
the large family of misers. Misers are generally exhibited in a
ridiculous and whimsical light; the worst do not go beyond egotism or
harshness. The greater portion increase their fortune by continually
investing; some (they are but few) lend at thirty per cent.; the most
decided hardly venture any risk with their means; but it is almost an
unheard-of thing for a miser to proceed to crime, even murder, in the
acquisition of fresh wealth.

That is easily accounted for; avarice is especially a negative passion.
The miser, in his incessant calculations, thinks more of becoming richer
by not disbursing; in tightening around him, more and more, the limits
of strict necessity, than he does of enriching himself at the cost of
another; he is especially the martyr to preservation. Weak, timid,
cunning, distrustful, and, above all, prudent and circumspect, never
offensive, indifferent to the ills of his neighbour,--the miser at least
never alludes to these ills,--he is, before all and above all, the man
of certainty and surety; or, rather, he is only a miser because he
believes only in the substantial, the hard gold which he has locked up
in his chest. Speculations and loans, on even undoubted security, tempt
him but little, for, how improbable soever it may be, they always offer
a chance of loss, and he prefers rather to lose the interest of his
money than expose his capital. A man so timorous will, therefore, seldom
have the savage energy of the wretch who risks the galleys or his neck
to lay hands on the wealth of another.

Risk is a word erased from the vocabulary of the miser. It is in this
sense that Jacques Ferrand was, let us say, a very singular exception,
perhaps a new variety of the genus Miser; for Jacques Ferrand did risk,
and a great deal. He relied on his craft, which was excessive; on his
hypocrisy, which was unbounded; on his intellect, which was elastic and
fertile; on his boldness, which was devilish, in assuring him impunity
for his crimes, and they were already numerous.

Jacques Ferrand was a twofold exception. Usually these adventurous,
energetic spirits, which do not recoil before any crime that will
procure gold, are beset by turbulent passions--gaming, dissipation,
gluttony, or other pleasures. Jacques Ferrand knew none of these violent
and stormy desires; cunning and patient as a forger, cruel and resolute
as an assassin, he was as sober and regular as Harpagon. One passion
alone was active within him, and this we have seen too fatally exhibited
in his early conduct to Louise. The loan of thirteen hundred francs to
Morel at high interest was, in Ferrand's hands, a snare--a means of
oppression and a source of profit. Sure of the lapidary's honesty, he
was certain of being repaid in full some day or other. Still Louise's
beauty must have made a deep impression on him to have made him lay out
of a sum of money so advantageously placed.

Except this weakness, Jacques Ferrand loved gold only. He loved gold for
gold's sake; not for the enjoyments it procured,--he was a stoic; not
for the enjoyments it might procure,--he was not sufficiently poetical
to enjoy speculatively, like some misers. With regard to what belonged
to himself, he loved possession for possession's sake; with regard to
what belonged to others, if it concerned a large deposit, for instance,
liberally confided to his probity only, he experienced in returning this
deposit the same agony, the same despair, as the goldsmith, Cardillac,
did in separating himself from a casket of jewels which his own
exquisite taste had fashioned into a _chef-d'oeuvre_ of art. With the
notary, his character for extreme probity was his _chef-d'oeuvre_ of
art; a deposit was to him a jewel, which he could not surrender but with
poignant regrets. What care, what cunning, what stratagems, what skill,
in a word, what art, did he use to attract this sum into his own strong
box, still maintaining that extreme character for honour, which was
beset with the most precious marks of confidence, like the pearls and
diamonds in the golden diadems of Cardillac. The more this celebrated
goldsmith approached perfection, they say, the more value did he attach
to his ornaments, always considering the last as his _chef-d'oeuvre_,
and being utterly distressed at giving it up. The more Jacques Ferrand
grew perfect in crime, the more he clung to the open and constant marks
of confidence which were showered upon him, always considering his last
deceit as his _chef-d'oeuvre_.

We shall see in the sequel of this history that, by the aid of certain
means really prodigious in plan and carrying out, he contrived to
appropriate to himself, with impunity, several very considerable sums.
His secret and mysterious life gave him incessant and terrible emotions,
such as gaming gives to the gambler. Against all other men's fortunes
Jacques Ferrand staked his hypocrisy, his boldness, his head; and he
played on velvet, as it is called, far out of the reach of human
justice, which he vulgarly and energetically characterised as a chimney
which might fall on one's head; for him to lose was only not to gain;
and, moreover, he was so criminally gifted that, in his bitter irony, he
saw a continued gain in boundless esteem, the unlimited confidence
which he inspired, not only in a multitude of rich clients, but also in
the smaller tradespeople and workmen of his district. A great many of
these placed their money with him, saying, "He is not charitable, it is
true; he is a devotee, and that's a pity; but he is much safer than the
government or the savings-banks." In spite of his uncommon ability, this
man had committed two of those mistakes from which the most skilful
rogues do not always escape; forced by circumstances, it is true, he had
associated with himself two accomplices. This immense fault, as he
called it, had been in part repaired; neither of his two associates
could destroy him without destroying themselves, and neither would have
reaped from denunciation any other profit but of drawing down justice on
themselves as well as on the notary; on this score he was quite easy.
Besides, he was not at the end of his crimes, and the disadvantages of
accompliceship were balanced by the criminal aid which at times he still
obtained.

A few words as to the personal appearance of M. Ferrand, and we will
introduce the reader into the notary's study, where we shall encounter
some of the principal personages in this recital.

M. Ferrand was fifty years of age, but did not appear forty; he was of
middle height, with broad and stooping shoulders, powerful, thickset,
strong-limbed, red-haired, and naturally as hirsute as a bear. His hair
was flat on his temples, his forehead bald, his eyebrows scarcely
perceptible; his bilious complexion was almost concealed by innumerable
red spots, and, when strong emotion agitated him, his yellow and murky
countenance was injected with blood, and became a livid red. His face
was as flat as a death's head, as is vulgarly said; his nose thick and
flat; his lips so thin, so imperceptible, that his mouth seemed incised
in his face, and, when he smiled with his villainous and revolting air,
his teeth seemed as though supplied by black and rotten fangs. His
pallid face had an expression at once austere and devout, impassible and
inflexible, cold and reflective; whilst his small, black, animated,
peering, and restless eyes were lost behind large green spectacles.

Jacques Ferrand saw admirably well; but, sheltered by his glasses, he
had an immense advantage; he could observe without being observed; and
well he knew how often a glance is unwittingly full of meaning. In spite
of his imperturbable audacity, he had met twice or thrice in his life
certain potent and magnetic looks, before which his own had compulsorily
been lowered; and in some important circumstances it is fatal to lower
the eyes before the man who interrogates, accuses, or judges you. The
large spectacles of M. Ferrand were thus a kind of covert retrenchment,
whence he could reconnoitre and observe every movement of the enemy; and
all the world was the notary's enemy, because all the world was, more or
less, his dupe; and accusers are but enlightened or disgusted dupes. He
affected a negligence in his dress almost amounting to dirtiness, or
rather, he was naturally so; his chin shaven only every two or three
days, his grimy and wrinkled head, his broad nails encircled in black,
his unpleasant odour, his threadbare coat, his greasy hat, his coarse
neckcloth, his black-worsted stockings, his clumsy shoes, all curiously
betokened his worthiness with his clients, by giving him an air of
disregard of the world, and an air of practical philosophy, which
delighted them.

They said: "What tastes, what passions, what feelings, what weaknesses,
must the notary sacrifice to obtain the confidence he inspires! He
gains, perhaps, sixty thousand francs (2,400_l._) a year, and his
household consists of a servant and an old housekeeper. His only
pleasure is to go on Sundays to mass and vespers, and he knows no opera
comparable to the grave chanting of the organ, no worldly society which
is worth an evening quietly passed at his fireside corner with the curé
of the parish after a frugal dinner; in fine, he places his enjoyment
in probity, his pride in honour, his happiness in religion."

Such was the opinion of the contemporaries of M. Jacques Ferrand.




CHAPTER IV.

THE OFFICE.


The office of M. Ferrand resembled all other offices, and his clerks all
other clerks. It was approached through an antechamber, furnished with
four old chairs. In the office, properly so-called, surrounded by rows
of shelves, ornamented with pasteboard boxes, containing the papers of
the clients of M. Ferrand, five young men, stooping over black wooden
desks, were laughing, gossiping, or scribbling perpetually. A
waiting-room, also filled with pasteboard boxes, and in which the chief
clerk was constantly stationed, and another room, which, for greater
secrecy, was kept unoccupied, between the notary's private room and the
waiting-room, completed the total of this laboratory of deeds of every
description.

An old cuckoo-clock, placed between the two windows of the office, had
just struck two o'clock, and a certain bustle prevailed amongst the
clerks; a part of their conversation will inform the reader as to the
cause of this excitement.

"Well, if any one had told me that François Germain was a thief," said
one of the young men, "I should have said, 'That's a lie!'"

"So should I."

"And I."

"And I. It really quite affected me to see him arrested and led away by
the police. I could not eat any breakfast; but I have been rewarded by
not having to eat the daily mess doled out by Mother Séraphin, for, as
the song goes:

      'To eat the allowance of old Séraphin,
        One must have a twist indeed.'"

"Capital! why, Chalamel, you are beginning your poetry already."

"I demand Chalamel's head!"

"Folly apart, it is very terrible for poor Germain."

"Seventeen thousand francs (680_l._) is a lump of money!"

"I believe you!"

"And yet, for the fifteen months that Germain has been cashier, he was
never a farthing deficient in making up his books."

"I think the governor was wrong to arrest Germain, for the poor fellow
swore that he had only taken thirteen hundred francs (52_l._) in gold,
and that, moreover, he brought back the thirteen hundred francs this
morning, to return them to the money-chest, at the very moment when our
master sent for the police."

"Ah, that's the bore of people of such ferocious honesty as our
governor, they have no pity!"

"But they ought to think twice before they ruin a poor young fellow,
who, up to this time, has behaved with strict honesty."

"M. Ferrand said he did it for an example."

"Example? What? It is none to the honest, and the dishonest know well
enough what they expose themselves to if they are found out in any
delinquencies."

"Our house seems to produce lots of jobs for the police officers."

"What do you mean?"

"Why, this morning there was poor little Louise, and now poor Germain."

"I confess that Germain's affair was not quite clear to me."

"But he confessed?"

"He confessed that he had taken thirteen hundred francs, certainly; but
he declared most vehemently that he had not taken the other fifteen
thousand francs in bank-notes, and the other seven hundred francs which
are short in the strong box."

"True; and, if he confessed one thing, why shouldn't he confess
another?"

"Exactly so; for a man is as much punished for five hundred francs as he
is for fifteen thousand francs."

"Yes; only they retain the fifteen thousand francs, and, when they leave
prison, this forms a little fund to start upon; and, as the swan of
Cambrai sings:

      'To get a jolly lot of "swag"
       A cove must dip deep in the lucky-bag.'"

"I demand Chalamel's head!"

"Can't you talk sense for five minutes?"

"Ah, here's Jabulot! won't he be astonished?"

"What at, my boys? what at? Anything fresh about poor Louise?"

"You would have known, roving blade, if you had not been so long in your
rounds."

"What, you think it is but a step from here to the Rue de Chaillot?"

"I never said so."

"Well, what about that gallant don, the famous Viscount de Saint-Rémy?"

"Has he not been here yet?"

"No."

"Well, his horses were harnessed, and he sent me word by his _valet de
chambre_, that he would come here directly. But he didn't seem best
pleased, the servant said. Oh, my boys! such a lovely little house,
furnished most magnificently, like one of the dwellings of the olden
time that Faublas writes about. Oh, Faublas! he is my hero--my model!"
said the clerk, putting down his umbrella and taking off his clogs.

"You are right, Jabulot; for, as that sublime old blind man, Homer,
said:

      'Faublas, that amorous hero, it is said,
       Forsook the duchess for the waiting-maid.'"

"Yes; but then, she was a theatrical 'waiting-maid,' my lads."

"I demand Chalamel's head!"

"But about this Viscount de Saint-Rémy? Jabulot says his mansion is
superb."

"Pyramidic!"

"Then, I'll be bound, he has debts not a few, and arrests to match, this
viscount."

"A bill of thirty-four thousand francs (1,360_l._) has been sent here by
the officer. It is made payable at the office. This is his creditors'
doing; I don't know why or wherefore."

"Well, I should say that this dandy viscount would pay now, because he
came from the country last night, where he has been concealed these
three days, in order to escape from the bailiffs."

"How is it, then, that they have not seized the furniture already?"

"Why? oh, he's too cunning! The house is not his own; all the furniture
is in the name of his _valet de chambre_, who is said to let it to him
furnished; and, in the same way, his horses and carriages are in his
coachman's name, who declares that he lets to the viscount his splendid
turn-out at so much a month. Ah, he's a 'downy' one, is M. de
Saint-Rémy! But what were you going to tell me? what has happened here
fresh?"

"Why, imagine the governor coming in here two hours ago in a most awful
passion. 'Germain is not here?' he exclaimed. 'No, sir.' 'Well, the
rascal has robbed me last night of seventeen thousand francs!' says the
governor."

"Germain--rob--ah, come, that's 'no go!'"

"You will hear. 'What, sir, are you sure? but it cannot be,' we all
cried out. 'I tell you, gentlemen,' said the governor, 'that yesterday I
put in the drawer of the bureau at which he writes, fifteen notes of one
thousand francs each, and two thousand francs in gold, in a little box,
and it is all gone.' At this moment old Marriton, the porter, came in,
and he said, 'Sir, the police are coming; where is Germain?' 'Wait a
bit,' said the governor to the porter; 'as soon as M. Germain returns,
send him into the office, without saying a word. I will confront him
before you all, gentlemen,' said the governor. At the end of a quarter
of an hour in comes poor Germain, as if nothing had happened. Old Mother
Séraphin had brought in our morning mess. Germain made his bow to the
governor, and wished us all 'good morning,' as usual. 'Germain, don't
you take your breakfast?' inquired M. Ferrand. 'No, thank you, sir, I am
not hungry.' 'You're very late this morning.' 'Yes, sir; I was obliged
to go to Belleville this morning.' 'No doubt to hide the money you have
stolen from me!' M. Ferrand said, in a terrible voice."

"And Germain?"

"The poor fellow turned as pale as death, and stammered out,
'Pray--pray, sir, do not ruin me--'"

"What! he had stolen--"

"Listen, Jabulot: 'Do not ruin me,' says he to the governor. 'What! you
confess it, then, you villain?' 'Yes, sir; but here is the money; I
thought I could replace it before you came into the office this morning;
but, unfortunately, a person who had a small sum of mine, and whom I
expected to find at home last night, had been at Belleville these two
days, and I was compelled to go there this morning; that made me late.
Pray, sir, forgive me,--do not destroy me! When I took the money I knew
I could return it this morning; and here are the thirteen hundred francs
in gold.' 'What do you mean by thirteen hundred francs?' exclaimed M.
Ferrand; 'what's the use of talking of thirteen hundred francs? You have
stolen, from the bureau in my room, fifteen thousand francs that were in
a green pocket-book, and two thousand francs in gold.' 'I? Never!' cried
poor Germain, quite aghast. 'I took thirteen hundred francs in gold, but
not a farthing more. I did not even see the pocket-book in the drawer;
there were only two thousand francs, in gold, in a box.' 'Oh, shameless
liar!' cried the governor; 'you confess to having plundered thirteen
hundred francs, and may just as well have stolen more; that will be for
the law to decide. I shall be without mercy for such an infamous breach
of trust; you shall be an example.' In fact, my dear Jabulot, the police
came in at that moment, with the commissary's chief clerk, to draw up
the depositions, and they laid hands on poor Germain; and that's all
about it."

"Really, you do surprise me! I feel as if some one had given me a thump
on the head. Germain--Germain, who seemed such an honest fellow,--a chap
to whom one would have given absolution without confession."

"I should say that he had some presentiment of his misfortune."

"How?"

"For some days past he seemed to have something on his mind."

"Perhaps about Louise."

"Louise?"

"Why, I only repeat what Mother Séraphin said this morning."

"What did she say?"

"What? that he was Louise's lover, and the father of her child."

"Sly dog! Do you think so?"

"Why--why--why--"

"Pooh! pooh!"

"That's not the case."

"How do you know, Master Jabulot?"

"Because it is not a fortnight ago that Germain told me, in confidence,
that he was over head and ears in love with a little needle-woman, a
very correct lass, whom he had known in the house where he lived; and,
when he talked of her, the tears came in his eyes."

"Why, Jabulot, you are getting quite poetical."

"He says Faublas is his hero, and he is not 'wide awake' enough to know
that a man may be in love with one woman and a lover of another at the
same time; for, as the tender Fénélon says, in his Instructions to the
Duke of Burgundy:

      'A spicy blade, of the right cock-feather,
       May love a blonde and brunette together.'"

"I demand Chalamel's head!"

"I tell you that Germain spoke in earnest."

At this moment the head clerk entered the office.

"Well, M. Jabulot," said he, "have you completed your rounds?"

"Yes, M. Dubois; I have been to M. de Saint-Remy, and he will come and
pay immediately."

"And as to the Countess Macgregor?"

"Here is her answer."

"And the Countess d'Orbigny?"

"She returns her compliments to our employer. She only arrived from
Normandy yesterday morning, and did not know that her reply was required
so soon; here is a note from her. I also called on the Marquis
d'Harville's steward, as he desired me to receive the money for drawing
up the contract which I witnessed at their house the other day."

"You should have told him there was no hurry."

"I did, but the steward insisted on paying. Here is the money. Oh! I had
almost forgotten to say, M. Badinot said that M. Ferrand had better do
as they had agreed; it was the best thing to do."

"He did not write an answer?"

"No, sir; he said he had not time."

"Very well."

"M. Charles Robert will come in the course of the morning to speak to
our master. It seems that he fought a duel yesterday with the Duke de
Lucenay."

"And is he wounded?"

"I think not, or else they would have told me so at the house."

"Hark! there's a carriage stopping at the door."

"Oh, what fine horses! how full of spirits they are!"

"And that fat English coachman, with his white wig, and brown livery
striped with silver, and his epaulettes like a colonel!"

"It must be some ambassador's."

"And the _chasseur_, look how he is bedizened all over with silver!"

"And what moustachios!"

"Oh," said Jabulot, "it is the Viscount de Saint-Remy's carriage!"

"What! is that the way he does it? Oh, my!"

Soon after the Viscount de Saint-Remy entered the office.

We have already described the handsome appearance, elegance of style,
and aristocratical demeanour of M. de Saint-Remy, when he was on his way
to the farm of Arnouville (the estate of Madame de Lucenay), where he
had found a retreat from the pursuit of the bailiffs, Malicorne and
Bourdin. The viscount, who entered unceremoniously into the office, with
his hat on his head, a haughty and disdainful look, and his eyes half
closed, asked, with an air of extreme superciliousness, and without
looking at anybody:

"Where is the notary?"

"M. Ferrand is engaged in his private room," said the chief clerk. "If
you will please to wait a moment, sir, he will see you."

"What do you mean by wait a moment?"

"Why, sir--"

"There is no why in the case, sir. Go and tell him that M. de Saint-Remy
is here; and I am much surprised that this notary should make me dance
attendance in his waiting-room. It is really most annoying."

"Will you walk into this side room, sir?" said the chief clerk, "and I
will inform M. Ferrand this instant."

M. de Saint-Remy shrugged his shoulders, and followed the head clerk. At
the end of a quarter of an hour, which seemed very tedious to him, and
which converted his spleen into anger, the viscount was introduced into
the notary's private apartment.

Nothing could be more striking than the contrast between these two men,
both of them profound physiognomists, and habituated to judge at a
glance of the persons with whom they had business. M. de Saint-Remy saw
Jacques Ferrand for the first time, and was struck with the expression
of his pallid, harsh, and impassive features,--the look concealed by the
large green spectacles; the skull half hid beneath an old black silk
cap. The notary was seated at his writing-desk, in a leathern armchair,
beside a low fireplace, almost choked up with ashes, and in which were
two black and smoking logs of wood. Curtains of green cotton, almost in
rags, hung on small iron rings at the windows, and, concealing the lower
window-panes, threw over the room, which was naturally dark, a livid and
unpleasant hue. Shelves of black wood were filled with deed-boxes, all
duly labelled. Some cherry-wood chairs, covered with threadbare Utrecht
velvet; a clock in a mahogany case; a floor yellow, damp, and chilling;
a ceiling full of cracks, and festooned with spiders' webs,--such was
the _sanctum sanctorum_ of M. Jacques Ferrand. Hardly had the viscount
made two steps into his cabinet, or spoken a word, than the notary, who
knew him by reputation, conceived an intense antipathy towards him. In
the first place, he saw in him, if we may say so, a rival in rogueries;
and then he hated elegance, grace, and youth in other persons, and more
especially when these advantages were attended with an air of insolent
superiority. The notary usually assumed a tone of rude and almost coarse
abruptness with his clients, who liked him the better for being in
behaviour like a boor of the Danube. He made up his mind to double this
brutality towards M. de Saint-Remy, who, only knowing the notary by
report also, expected to find an attorney either familiar or a fool; for
the viscount always imagined men of such probity as M. Ferrand had the
reputation for, as having an exterior almost ridiculous, but, so far
from this, the countenance and appearance of the attorney at law struck
the viscount with an undefinable feeling,--half fear, half aversion.
Consequently, his own resolute character made M. de Saint-Remy increase
his usual impertinence and effrontery. The notary kept his cap on his
head, and the viscount did not doff his hat, but exclaimed, as he
entered the room, with a loud and imperative tone:

"_Pardieu_, sir! it is very strange that you should give me the trouble
to come here, instead of sending to my house for the money for the bills
I accepted from the man Badinot, and for which the fellow has issued
execution against me. It is true you tell me that you have also another
very important communication to make to me; but then, surely, that is no
excuse for making me wait for half an hour in your antechamber: it is
really most annoying, sir!"

M. Ferrand, quite unmoved, finished a calculation he was engaged in,
wiped his pen methodically in a moist sponge which encircled his
inkstand of cracked earthenware, and raised towards the viscount his
icy, earthy, flat face, shaded by his spectacles. He looked like a
death's head in which the eye-holes had been replaced by large, fixed,
staring green eyeballs. After having looked at the viscount for a moment
or two, the notary said to him, in a harsh and abrupt tone:

"Where's the money?"

This coolness exasperated M. de Saint-Rémy.

He--he, the idol of the women, the envy of the men, the model of the
first society in Paris, the dreaded duellist--produced no effect on a
wretched attorney-at-law! It was horrid; and, although he was only
_tête-à-tête_ with Jacques Ferrand, his pride revolted.

"Where are the bills?" inquired the viscount, abruptly.

With the point of one of his fingers, as hard as iron, and covered with
red hair, the notary rapped on a large leathern pocket-book which lay
close beside him. Resolved on being as laconic, although trembling with
rage, M. de Saint-Remy took from the pocket of his upper coat a Russian
leather pocket-book, with gold clasps, from which he drew forth forty
notes of a thousand francs each, and showed them to the notary.

"How many are there?" he inquired.

"Forty thousand francs."

"Hand them to me!"

"Take them! and let this have a speedy termination. Ply your trade, pay
yourself, and give me the bills," said the viscount, as he threw the
notes on the table, with an impatient air.

The notary took up the bank-notes, rose, went close to the window to
examine them, turning and re-turning them over and over, one by one,
with an attention so scrupulous, and really so insulting for M. de
Saint-Rémy, that the viscount actually turned pale with rage. Jacques
Ferrand, as if he had guessed the thoughts which were passing in the
viscount's mind, shook his head, turned half towards him, and said to
him, with an indefinable accent:

"I have seen--"

M. de Saint-Remy, confused for a moment, said, drily:

"What?"

"Forged bank-notes," replied the notary, continuing his scrutiny of a
note, which he had not yet examined.

"What do you mean by that remark, sir?"

Jacques Ferrand paused for a moment, looked steadfastly at the viscount
through his glasses, then, shrugging his shoulders slightly, he
continued to investigate the notes, without uttering a syllable.

"Monsieur Notary! I would wish you to learn that, when I ask a question,
I have an answer!" cried M. de Saint-Remy, exasperated at the coolness
of Jacques Ferrand.

"These notes are good," said the notary, turning towards his bureau,
whence he took a small bundle of stamped papers, to which were annexed
two bills of exchange; then, putting down one of the bank-notes for one
thousand francs and three rouleaus, of one hundred francs each, on the
table, he said to M. de Saint-Remy, pointing to the money and the bills
with his finger:

"Here's your change out of the forty thousand francs; my client has
desired me to deduct the expenses."

The viscount had contained himself with great difficulty whilst Jacques
Ferrand was making out the account, and, instead of taking up the money,
he exclaimed, in a voice that literally shook with passion:

"I beg to know, sir, what you meant by saying, whilst you looked at the
bank-notes which I handed to you, that you 'had seen forged notes?'"

"What I meant?"

"Yes."

"Because I sent for you to come here on a matter of forgery."

And the notary fixed his green spectacles on the viscount.

"And how can this forgery in any way affect me?"

After a moment's silence, M. Ferrand said to the viscount, with a stern
air:

"Are you aware, sir, of the duties which a notary fulfils?"

"Those duties appear to me, sir, very simple indeed; just now I had
forty thousand francs, now I have thirteen hundred francs left."

"You are facetious, sir; I will tell you that a notary is, in temporal
matters, what a confessor is in spiritual affairs; by virtue of his
position, he often becomes possessed of disgraceful secrets."

"Go on, I beg, sir."

"He is often brought into contact with rogues."

"Go on, sir."

"He ought, as well as he can, to prevent an honourable name from being
dragged through the mud."

"What is all this to me?"

"Your father's name is deservedly respected; you, sir, dishonour it."

"How dare you, sir, to address such language to me?"

"But for the interest which the gentleman, of whom I speak, inspires in
the minds of all honest men, instead of being summoned before me, you
would, at this moment, be standing before a police-magistrate."

"I do not understand you."

"Two months since, you discounted, through an agent, a bill for
fifty-eight thousand francs (2,320_l._), accepted by the house of
Meulaert & Company, of Hamburg, in favour of a certain William Smith,
payable in three months, at the bank of M. Grimaldi, of Paris."

"Well?"

"That bill was a forgery."

"Impossible!"

"That bill was a forgery! the firm of Meulaert never gave such a bill to
William Smith, and never had such a transaction with such an
individual."

"Can this be true?" exclaimed M. de Saint-Rémy, with equal surprise and
indignation; "then I have been most infamously deceived, sir, for I took
the bill as ready money."

"From whom?"

"From M. William Smith himself; the house of Meulaert is so well known,
and I was so firmly convinced myself of the honour of M. William Smith,
that I took the bill in payment of a debt he owed me."

"William Smith never existed,--he is an imaginary personage."

"Sir, you insult me!"

"His signature is forged and false, as well as all the rest of the
bill."

"I assert that M. William Smith is alive; but I must have been the dupe
of a horrible abuse of confidence."

"Poor young man!"

"Explain yourself, sir."

"The actual holder of the bill is convinced you committed the forgery."

"Sir!"

"He declares that he has proof of this; and he came to me the day before
yesterday, requesting me to see you, and offer to give up this forged
document, under certain conditions. Up to this point all was
straightforward, but what follows is not so, and I only speak to you now
according to my instructions. He requires one hundred thousand francs
(4,000_l._) down this very day, or else to-morrow, at twelve o'clock at
noon, the forged bill will be handed over to the king's
attorney-general."

"This is infamous, sir!"

"It is more,--it is absurd. You are a ruined man; you were all but
arrested for the sum which you have just paid me, and which you have
scraped up I cannot tell from where; and this I have told to the holder
of the bill, who replied, that a certain great and very rich lady would
not allow you to remain in this embarrassment."

"Enough, sir! enough!"

"More infamous! more absurd! agreed."

"Well, sir, and what is required of me?"

"Why, to work out infamously an action infamously commenced. I have
consented to communicate this proposition to you, although it disgusts
me, as an honest man ought to feel disgust on such an occasion; but now
it is your affair. If you are guilty, choose between a criminal court
and the means of ransom offered to you; my duty is only an official one,
and I will not dirty my fingers any further in so foul a transaction.
The third party is called M. Petit-Jean, an oil merchant, who lives on
the banks of the Seine, Quai de Billy, No. 10. Make your arrangements
with him; you are fit to meet if you are a forger, as he declares."

M. de Saint-Remy had entered Jacques Ferrand's study with a lip all
scorn, and a head all pride. Although he had in his life committed
some shameful actions, he still retained a certain elevation of race,
and an instinctive courage, which had never forsaken him. At the
beginning of this conversation, considering the notary as an adversary
beneath him, he had been content to treat him with disdain; but, when
Jacques Ferrand began to talk of forgery, he felt annihilated; in his
turn he felt himself rode over by the notary. But for the entire command
of self which he possessed, he could not have concealed the terrible
impression which this unexpected revelation disclosed to him, for it
might have incalculable consequences to him,--consequences unsuspected
by the notary himself. After a moment of silence and reflection, he
resigned himself,--he, so haughty, so irritable, so vain of his
self-possession!--to beg of this coarse man, who had so roughly
addressed to him the stern language of probity:

"Sir, you give me a proof of your interest, for which I thank you, and I
regret that any hasty expressions should have escaped me," said M. de
Saint-Remy, with a tone of cordiality.

"I do not take the slightest interest in or for you," replied the
notary, brutally. "Your father is the soul of honour, and I would not
wish that in the depth of that solitude in which he lives, as they tell
me, at Angers, he should learn that his name has been exposed,
tarnished, degraded, in a court of justice, that's all."

"I repeat to you, sir, that I am incapable of the infamy which is
attributed to me."

"You may tell that to M. Petit-Jean."

"But I confess that, in the absence of M. Smith, who has so unworthily
abused my confidence, that--"

"The scoundrel Smith!"

"The absence of M. Smith places me in a cruel embarrassment. I am
innocent,--let them accuse me, I will prove myself guiltless; but such
an accusation, even, must always disgrace a gentleman."

"Well?"

"Be so good as to use the sum I have just handed to you in part payment
to the person who holds the acceptance."

"That money belongs to a client and is sacred."

"In two or three days I will repay you."

"You will not be able."

"I have resources."

"You have none; not visible at least. Your household furniture, your
horses, do not belong to you, as you declare; this has to me the
appearance of a disgraceful fraud."

"You are severe, sir; but, admitting what you say, do you not suppose
that I shall turn everything into money in such a desperate extremity?
Only, as it will be impossible for me to procure, between this and noon
to-morrow, the one hundred thousand francs, I entreat you to employ the
money I have just handed to you in procuring this unfortunate bill, or,
at least, as you are very rich, advance the money. Do not leave me in
such a position."

"Me? Why, is the man mad?"

"Sir, I beseech you, in my father's name, which you have mentioned to
me, be so kind as to--"

"I am kind to those who deserve it," said the notary, harshly. "An
honest man myself, I hate swindlers, and should not be sorry to see one
of those high-minded gentlemen, without faith or honour, impious and
reprobate, put in the pillory, as an example to others; but I hear your
horses, who are impatient to depart, M. le Vicomte," said the notary,
with a smile that displayed his black fangs.

At this moment some one knocked at the door of the apartment.

"Who's there?" inquired Jacques Ferrand.

"Madame the Countess d'Orbigny," said the chief clerk.

"Request her to wait a moment."

"The stepmother of the Marchioness d'Harville?" exclaimed M. de
Saint-Remy.

"Yes, sir; she has an appointment with me,--so, your servant, sir."

"Not a word of this, sir!" cried M. de Saint-Remy, in a menacing voice.

"I told you, sir, that a notary is as discreet as a confessor."

Jacques Ferrand rang, and the clerk appeared.

"Show Madame d'Orbigny in." Then, addressing the viscount, "Take these
thirteen hundred francs, sir; they will be something towards an
arrangement with M. Petit-Jean."

Madame d'Orbigny (formerly Madame Roland) entered at the moment when M.
de Saint-Remy went out, his features convulsed with rage at having so
uselessly humiliated himself before the notary.

"Ah, good day, M. de Saint-Remy," said Madame d'Orbigny; "what a time it
is since I saw you!"

"Why, madame, since D'Harville's marriage, at which I was present, I do
not think I have had the pleasure of meeting you," said M. de
Saint-Remy, bowing, and assuming an affable and smiling demeanour. "You
have remained in Normandy ever since, I think?"

"Why, yes! M. d'Orbigny will only live in the country, and what he likes
I like; so you see in me a complete country wife. I have not been in
Paris since the marriage of my dear stepdaughter with that excellent M.
d'Harville. Do you see him frequently?"

"D'Harville has grown very sullen and morose; he is seldom seen in the
world," said M. de Saint-Remy, with something like impatience, for the
conversation was most irksome to him, both because of its untimeliness
and that the notary seemed amused at it; but Madame d'Harville's
stepmother, enchanted at thus meeting with a dandy of the first water,
was not the woman to allow her prey to escape her so easily.

"And my dear stepdaughter," she continued,--"she, I hope, is not as
morose as her husband?"

"Madame d'Harville is all the fashion, and has the world at her feet, as
a lovely woman should have. But I take up your time, and--"

"Not at all, I assure you. It is quite agreeable to me to meet the
'observed of all observers,'--the monarch of fashion,--for, in ten
minutes, I shall be as _au fait_ of Paris as if I had never left it. And
your dear M. de Lucenay, who was also present at M. d'Harville's
marriage?"

"A still greater oddity. He has been travelling in the East, and
returned in time to receive a sword-wound yesterday,--nothing serious,
though."

"Poor dear duke! And his wife, always lovely and fascinating?"

"Madame, I have the honour to be one of her profoundest admirers, and my
testimony would, therefore, be received with suspicion. I beg, on your
return to Aubiers, you will not forget my regards to M. d'Orbigny."

"He will, I am sure, be most sensible of your kindness; he often talks
of you, and says you remind him of the Duke de Lauzun."

"His comparison is a eulogy in itself, but, unfortunately, infinitely
more flattering than true. Adieu, madame, for I fear I must not ask to
be allowed to pay my respects to you before your departure."

"I should lament to give you the trouble of calling on me, for I have
pitched my tent for a few days in a furnished hôtel; but if, in the
summer or autumn, you should be passing our way, _en route_ to some of
those fashionable châteaus where the leaders of _ton_ dispute the
pleasure of receiving you, pray give us a few days of your society, if
it be only by way of contrast, and to rest yourself with us poor rustic
folk from the whirl of your high life of fashion and distinction; for
where you are it is always delightful to be."

"Madame!"

"I need not say how delighted M. d'Orbigny and myself would be to
receive you; but adieu, sir, I fear the kind attorney (she pointed to
Ferrand) will grow impatient at our gossip."

"Quite the reverse, madame, quite the reverse," said Ferrand, with an
emphasis that redoubled the repressed rage of M. de Saint-Remy.

[Illustration: _He will scold you awfully._
Original Etching by Adrian Marcel.]

"Is not M. Ferrand a terrible man?" said Madame d'Orbigny, affectedly.
"Mind now, I tell you, that, if he has charge of your affairs, he will
scold you awfully. He is the most unpitying man--But that's my nonsense;
on the contrary, why, such an exquisite as you to have M. Ferrand for
his solicitor is a proof of reformation, for we know very well that he
never allows his clients to do foolish things; if they do, he gives up
their business. Oh, he will not be everybody's lawyer!" Then, turning to
Jacques Ferrand: "Do you know, most puritanical solicitor, that you have
made a splendid conversion there? If you reform the exquisite of
exquisites, the King of the Mode--"

"It is really a conversion, madame. The viscount left my study a very
different man from what he entered it."

"There, I tell you that you perform miracles!"

"Ah, madame, you flatter me," said Jacques Ferrand, with emphasis.

M. de Saint-Remy made a low bow to Madame d'Orbigny, and then, as he
left the notary, desirous of trying once more to excite his pity, he
said to him, in a careless tone, which, however, betrayed deep anxiety:

"Then, my dear M. Ferrand, you will not grant me the favour I ask?"

"Some wild scheme, no doubt. Be inexorable, my dear Puritan," cried
Madame d'Orbigny, laughing.

"You hear, sir? I must not contradict such a handsome lady."

"My dear M. Ferrand, let us speak seriously of serious things, and, you
know, this is a most serious matter. Do you really refuse me?" inquired
the viscount, with an anxiety which he could not altogether dissemble.

The notary was cruel enough to appear to hesitate; M. de Saint-Remy had
an instant's hope.

"What, man of iron, do you yield?" said Madame d'Harville's stepmother,
laughing still. "Do you, too, yield to the charm of the irresistible?"

"_Ma foi_, madame! I was on the point of yielding, as you say; but you
make me blush for my weakness," added M. Ferrand. And then, addressing
himself to the viscount, he said to him, with an accent of which
Saint-Remy felt all the meaning, "Well then, seriously," (and he dwelt
on the word), "it is impossible."

"Ah, the Puritan! Hark to the Puritan!" said Madame d'Orbigny.

"See M. Petit-Jean. He will think precisely as I do, I am sure, and,
like me, will say to you 'No!'"

M. de Saint-Remy rushed out in despair.

After a moment's reflection he said to himself, "It must be so!" Then he
added, addressing his chasseur, who was standing with the door of his
carriage opened, "To the Hôtel de Lucenay."

Whilst M. de Saint-Remy is on his way to see the duchess, we will
present the reader at the interview between M. Ferrand and the
stepmother of Madame d'Harville.




CHAPTER V.

THE CLIENTS.


The reader may have forgotten the portrait of the stepmother of Madame
d'Harville as drawn by the latter. Let us then repeat, that Madame
d'Orbigny was a slight, fair, delicate woman, with eyelashes almost
white, round and palish blue eyes, with a soft voice, a hypocritical
air, insidious and insinuating manners. Any one who studied her
treacherous and perfidious countenance would detect therein craft and
cruelty.

"What a delightful young man M. de Saint-Remy is!" said Madame d'Orbigny
to Jacques Ferrand, when the viscount had left them.

"Delightful! But, madame, let us now proceed to our business. You wrote
to me from Normandy that you desired to consult me upon most serious
matters."

"Have you not always been my adviser ever since the worthy Doctor
Polidori introduced me to you? By the way, have you heard from him
recently?" inquired Madame d'Orbigny, with an air of complete
carelessness.

"Since he left Paris he has not written me a single line," replied the
notary, with an air of similar indifference.

Let the reader understand that these two persons lied most unequivocally
to each other. The notary had seen Polidori (one of his two accomplices)
recently, and had proposed to him to go to Asnières, to the Martials,
the fresh-water pirates, of whom we shall presently speak,--had proposed
to him, we say, to poison Louise Morel, under the name of Doctor
Vincent. Madame d'Harville's stepmother, on her side, had come to Paris
in order to have a secret meeting with this scoundrel, who had been for
a long time concealed, as we have said, under the name of César
Bradamanti.

"But it is not the good doctor of whom we have to discourse," continued
Madame d'Harville's stepmother. "You see me very uneasy. My husband is
indisposed; his health becomes weaker and weaker every day. Without
experiencing serious alarm, his condition gives me much concern,--or
rather, gives him much concern," said Madame d'Orbigny, drying her eyes,
which were slightly moistened.

"What is the business, madame?"

"He is constantly talking of making his last arrangements,--of his will."
Here Madame d'Orbigny concealed her face in her pocket-handkerchief for
some minutes.

"It is very afflicting, no doubt," said the notary; "but the precaution
has nothing terrible in itself. And what may be M. d'Orbigny's
intentions, madame?"

"Dear sir! How do I know? You may suppose that when he commences the
subject I do not allow him to dwell on it long."

"Well, then, he has not up to this time told you anything positive?"

"I think," replied Madame d'Orbigny, with a deep sigh,--"I think that he
wishes to leave me not only all that the law will allow him to bequeath
to me, but--But, really, I pray of you, do not let us talk of that."

"Of what, then, shall we talk?"

"Alas, you are right, pitiless man! I must, in spite of myself, return
to the sad subject that brings me here to see you. Well, then, M.
d'Orbigny's inclination extends so far that he desires to sell a part of
his estate and present me with a large sum."

"But his daughter--his daughter?" exclaimed M. Ferrand, harshly. "I
must tell you that, during the last year, M. d'Harville has placed his
affairs in my hands, and I have lately purchased a splendid estate for
him. You know my blunt way of doing business? Whether M. d'Harville is
my client or not is no matter. I stand up only for justice. If your
husband makes up his mind to behave to his daughter in a way that I do
not approve, I tell you plainly he must not reckon on my assistance.
Upright and downright, such has always been my line of conduct."

"And mine, also! Therefore it is that I am always saying to my husband
what you now say to me, 'Your daughter has behaved very ill to you, that
is but too true; but that is no reason why you should disinherit her.'"

"Very good,--quite right! And what answer does he make to that?"

"He replies, 'I shall leave my daughter twenty-five thousand livres of
annual income (1,000_l._); she had more than a million (40,000_l._) from
her mother. Her husband has an enormous fortune of his own; and,
therefore, why should I not leave you the residue of my fortune,--you,
my tender love, the sole support, the only comfort of my declining
years, my guardian angel?' I repeat these very flattering words to you,"
said Madame d'Orbigny, with an air of modesty, "to prove to you how kind
M. d'Orbigny is to me. But, in spite of that, I have always refused his
offers; and, as he perceives that, he has compelled me to come and seek
you."

"But I do not know M. d'Orbigny."

"But he, like all the world, knows your high character."

"But why should he send you to me?"

"To put an end to all my scruples and refusals, he said to me, 'I will
not ask you to consult my notary, because you will think him too much
devoted to my service; but I will trust myself entirely to the decision
of a man of whose extreme probity of character I have heard you so
frequently speak in praise,--M. Jacques Ferrand. If he considers your
delicacy compromised by your consent to my wishes, we will not say
another word on the subject; otherwise, you must comply without a word.'
'I consent!' I replied to M. d'Orbigny. And so now you are the
arbitrator between us. 'If M. Ferrand approves,' added my husband, 'I
will send him ample power to realise in my name my rents and
investments, and he shall keep the proceeds in his hands as a deposit;
and thus, after my decease, my tender love, you will at least have an
existence worthy of you.'"

Perhaps M. Ferrand never had greater need of his spectacles than at this
moment; for, had he not worn them, Madame d'Orbigny would doubtless have
been struck with the sparkle of the notary's eyes, which seemed to dart
fire when the word deposit was pronounced. However, he replied, in his
usual coarse way:

"It is very tiresome. This is the tenth or twelfth time that I have been
made the arbitrator in a similar matter, always under the pretence of my
honesty,--that is the only word in people's mouths. My honesty!--my
honesty! What a fine quality, forsooth!--which only brings me in a great
deal of tiresome trouble."

"My good M. Ferrand! Come, do not repulse me. You will write at once to
M. d'Orbigny, who only awaits your letter to send you full powers to act
for him, and to realise the sum required."

"Which amounts to how much?"

"Why, I think he said four or five hundred thousand francs" (16,000_l._
or 20,000_l._).

"The sum, after all, is not so much as I thought. You are devoted to M.
d'Orbigny. His daughter is very rich; you have nothing. That is not
just; and I really think you should accept it."

"Really, do you think so, indeed?" said Madame d'Orbigny, who was the
dupe, like the rest of the world, of the proverbial probity of the
notary, and who had not been enlightened by Polidori in this particular.

"You may accept," he repeated.

"I will accept, then," said Madame d'Orbigny, with a sigh.

The chief clerk knocked at the door.

"Who is there?" inquired M. Ferrand.

"Madame the Countess Macgregor."

"Request her to wait a moment."

"I will go, then, my dear M. Ferrand," said Madame d'Orbigny. "You will
write to my husband, since he wishes it, and he will send you the
requisite authority by return of post?"

"I will write."

"Adieu, my worthy and excellent counsellor!"

"Ah, you do not know, you people of the world, how disagreeable it is to
take charge of such deposits,--the responsibility which we then assume.
I tell you that there is nothing more detestable in the world than this
fine character for probity, which brings down upon one all these
turmoils and troubles."

"And the admiration of all good people."

"Thank Heaven, I place otherwise than here below the hopes of the reward
at which I aim!" said M. Ferrand, in a hypocritical tone.

To Madame d'Orbigny succeeded Sarah Macgregor.

Sarah entered the cabinet of the notary with her usual coolness and
assurance. Jacques Ferrand did not know her, nor the motives of her
visit, and he therefore scrutinised her carefully in the hope of
catching another dupe. He looked most attentively at the countess; and,
despite the imperturbability of this marble-fronted woman, he observed a
slight working of the eyebrows, which betrayed a repressed
embarrassment. The notary rose from his seat, handed a chair, and,
motioning to Sarah to sit down, thus accosted her:

"You have requested of me, madame, an interview for to-day. I was very
much engaged yesterday, and could not reply until this morning. I beg
you will accept my apology for the delay."

"I was desirous of seeing you, sir, on a matter of the greatest
importance. Your reputation for honesty, kindness, and complaisance has
made me hope that the step I have taken with you will be successful."

The notary bent forward slightly in his chair.

"I know, sir, that your discretion is perfect."

"It is my duty, madame."

"You are, sir, a man of rigid, moral, and incorruptible character."

"Yes, madame."

"Yet, sir, if you were told that it depended on you to restore
life--more than life, reason--to an unhappy mother, should you have the
courage to refuse her?"

"If you will state the circumstances, madame, I shall be better able to
reply."

"It is fourteen years since, at the end of the month of December, 1824,
a man in the prime of life, and dressed in deep mourning, came to ask
you to take, by way of life-annuity, the sum of a hundred and fifty
thousand francs (6,000_l._), which it was desired should be sunk in
favour of a child of three years of age, whose parents were desirous of
remaining unknown."

"Well, madame?" said the notary, careful not to reply in the
affirmative.

"You assented, and took charge of this sum, agreeing to insure the child
a yearly pension of eight thousand francs (320_l._). Half this income
was to accumulate for the child's benefit until of age; the other half
was to be paid by you to the person who took care of this little girl."

"Well, madame?"

"At the end of two years," said Sarah, unable to repress a slight
emotion, "on the 28th of November, 1827, the child died."

"Before we proceed any farther, madame, with this conversation, I must
know what interest you take in this matter?"

"The mother of this little girl, sir, was--my sister.[2] I have here
proofs of what I advance: the declaration of the poor child's death, the
letters of the person who took charge of her, and the acknowledgment of
one of your clients with whom you have placed the hundred and fifty
thousand francs."

  [2] It is, perhaps, unnecessary to remind the reader that the
  child in question is Fleur-de-Marie, daughter of Rodolph and
  Sarah, and that the latter, in speaking of a pretended sister,
  tells a falsehood necessary for her plans, as will be seen. Sarah
  was convinced, as was Rodolph, also, of the death of the little
  girl.

"Allow me to see those papers, madame."

Somewhat astonished at not being believed on her word, Sarah drew from a
pocket-book several papers, which the notary examined with great
attention.

"Well, madame, what do you desire? The declaration of decease is
perfectly in order. The hundred and fifty thousand francs came to my
client, M. Petit-Jean, on the death of the child. It is one of the
chances of life-annuities, as I remarked to the person who placed the
affair in my hands. As to the pension, it was duly paid by me up to the
time of the child's decease."

"I am ready to declare, sir, that nothing could be more satisfactory
than your conduct throughout the whole of the affair. The female who had
charge of the child is also entitled to our gratitude, for she took the
greatest care of my poor little niece."

"True, madame. And I was so much satisfied with her conduct, that,
seeing her out of place after the death of the child, I took her into my
employment; and, since that time, she has remained with me."

"Is Madame Séraphin in your service, sir?"

"She has been my housekeeper these fourteen years, and I must ever speak
in her praise."

"Since that is the case, sir, she may be of the greatest use to us, if
you will kindly grant me a request, which may appear strange, perhaps
even culpable, at first sight, but when you know the motive--"

"A culpable request, madame, is what I cannot believe you capable of
addressing to me."

"Sir, I am acquainted with the rectitude of your principles; but all my
hope--my only hope--is in your pity. Under any event, I may rely on your
discretion?"

"Madame, you may."

"Well, then, I will proceed. The death of this poor child was so great a
shock to her mother, that her grief is as great now as it was fourteen
years since, and, having then feared for her life, we are now in dread
for her reason."

"Poor mother!" said M. Ferrand, in a tone of sympathy.

"Oh, yes, poor unhappy mother, indeed, sir! for she could only blush at
the birth of her child at the time when she lost it; whilst now
circumstances are such, that, if the child were still alive, my sister
could render her legitimate, be proud of her, and never again allow her
to quit her. Thus this incessant regret, coming to add to her other
sorrows, we are afraid every hour lest she should be bereft of her
senses."

"It is unfortunate that nothing can be done in the matter."

"Yes, sir--"

"What, madame?"

"Suppose some one told the poor mother, 'Your child was reported to be
dead, but she did not die: the woman who had charge of her when she was
little could vouch for this.'"

"Such a falsehood, madame, would be cruel. Why give so vain a hope to
the poor mother?"

"But, supposing it were not a falsehood, sir? or, rather, if the
supposition could be realised?"

"By a miracle? If it only required my prayers to be united with your own
to obtain this result, I would give them to you from the bottom of my
heart,--believe me, madame. Unfortunately, the register of decease is
strictly regular."

"Oh, yes, sir, I know well enough that the child is dead; and yet, if
you will agree, that misfortune need not be irreparable."

"Is this some riddle, madame?"

"I will speak more clearly. If my sister were to-morrow to recover her
daughter, she would be certain not only to be restored to health, but to
be wedded to the father of her child, who is now as free as herself. My
niece died at six years old. Separated from her parents from a very
tender age, they have not the slightest recollection of her. Suppose a
young girl of seventeen was produced (my niece would be about that
age),--a young girl (such as there are many) forsaken by her
parents,--and it was said to my sister, 'Here's your daughter, for you
have been imposed upon. Important interests have required that she
should have been said to be dead. The female who brought her up and a
respectable notary will confirm these facts, and prove to you that it is
really she--'"

Jacques Ferrand, after having allowed the countess to speak on without
interruption, rose abruptly, and exclaimed, with an indignant air:

"Madame, this is infamous!"

"Sir!"

"To dare to propose such a thing to me--to me! A supposititious child,
the destruction of a registry of decease; a criminal act, indeed! It is
the first time in my life that I was ever subjected to so outrageous a
proposal,--a proposal I have not merited, and you know it!"

"But, sir, what wrong does this do to any one? My sister and the
individual she desires to marry are widow and widower, and childless,
both bitterly lamenting the child they have lost. To deceive them is to
restore them to happiness, to life, is to ensure a happy destiny to some
poor, forsaken girl; and it becomes, therefore, a noble, a generous
action, and not a crime!"

"Really, madame, I marvel to see how the most execrable projects may be
coloured, so as to pass for beautiful pictures!"

"But, sir, reflect--"

"I repeat to you, madame, that it is infamous! And it is shameful to see
a lady of your rank lend herself to such abominable machinations,--to
which, I trust, your sister is a stranger."

"Sir--"

"Enough, madame, enough! I am not a polished gentleman, I am not, and I
shall speak my mind bluntly."

Sarah gave the notary a piercing look with her jet-black eyes, and said,
coldly:

"You refuse?"

"I pray, madame, that you will not again insult me."

"Beware!"

"What! Threats?"

"Threats! And that you may learn they are not vain ones, learn, first,
that I have no sister--"

"What, madame?"

"I am the mother of this child!"

"You?"

"I--I made a circuitous route to reach my end--coined a tale to excite
your interest; but you are pitiless. I raise the mask, you are for war.
Well, war be it then!"

"War! Because I refuse to associate myself with you in a criminal
machination! What audacity!"

"Listen to me, sir! Your reputation as an honest man is established,
acknowledged, undisputed--"

"Because deserved; and, therefore, you must have lost your reason to
make me such a proposal as you have done, and then threaten me because I
will not accede to it."

"I know, sir, better than any one how much reputations for immaculate
virtue are to be distrusted; they often mask wantonness in women and
roguery in men."

"Madame?"

"Ever since our conversation began,--I do not know why, but I have
mistrusted your claim to the esteem and consideration which you enjoy."

"Really, madame, your mistrust does honour to your penetration!"

"Does it not? For this mistrust is based on mere nothings--on
instinct--on inexplicable presentiments; but these intimations have
rarely beguiled me."

"Madame, let us terminate this conversation."

"First learn my determination. I begin by telling you that I am
convinced of the death of my poor daughter. But, no matter, I shall
pretend that she is not dead: the most unlikely things do happen. You
are at this moment in a position of which very many must be envious, and
would be delighted at any weapon with which to assail you. I will supply
one."

"You?"

"I, by attacking you under some absurd pretext, some irregularity in the
declaration of death; say--no matter what--I will insist that my child
is not dead. As I have the greatest interest in making it believed that
she is still alive, though lost, this action will be useful to me in
giving a wide circulation to the affair. A mother who claims her child
is always interesting; and I should have with me those who envy
you,--your enemies, and every sensitive and romantic mind."

"This is as mad as it is malevolent! What motive could I have in making
your daughter pass for dead, if she were not really defunct?"

"That is true enough, and the motive may be difficult to find; but,
then, have we not the attorneys and barristers at our elbows? Now I
think of it (excellent idea!), desirous of sharing with your client the
sum sunk in the annuity on this unfortunate child, you caused her
disappearance."

The unabashed notary shrugged his shoulders.

"If I had been criminal enough for that, instead of causing its
disappearance, I should have killed it!"

Sarah started with surprise, remained silent for a moment, and then
said, with bitterness:

"For a pious man, this is an idea of crime deeply reflective! Can I by
chance, then, have hit the mark when I fired at random? I must think of
this,--and think I will. One other word. You see the sort of woman I am:
I crush without remorse all obstacles that lie in my onward path.
Reflect well, then, for to-morrow this must be decided on. You may do
what I ask you with impunity. In his joy, the father of my daughter will
not think of doubting the possibility of his child's restoration, if our
falsehoods, which will make him happy, are adroitly combined. Besides,
he has no other proofs of the death of our daughter than those I wrote
to him of fourteen years ago, and I could easily persuade him that I had
deceived him on this subject; for then I had real causes of complaint
against him. I will tell him that in my grief I was desirous of breaking
every existing tie that bound us to each other. You cannot, therefore,
be compromised in any way. Affirm only, irreproachable man. Affirm that
all was in former days concerted between us,--you and me and Madame
Séraphin,--and you will be credited. As to the fifteen thousand francs
sunk in an annuity for my child, that is my affair solely. They will
remain acquired by your client, who must be kept profoundly ignorant of
this; and, moreover, you shall yourself name your own recompense."

Jacques Ferrand maintained all his _sang-froid_ in spite of the
singularity of his situation, remarkable and dangerous as it was. The
countess, really believing in the death of her daughter, had proposed to
the notary to pass off the dead child as living, whom, living, he had
declared to have died fourteen years before. He was too clever, and too
well acquainted with the perils of his position, not to understand the
effect of all Sarah's threats. His reputation, although admirably and
laboriously built up, was based on a substructure of sand. The public
detaches itself as easily as it becomes infatuated, liking to have the
right to trample under foot him whom but just now it elevated to the
skies. How could the consequences of the first assault on the reputation
of Jacques Ferrand be foreseen? However absurd the attack might be, its
very boldness might give rise to suspicions. Wishing to gain time to
determine on the mode by which he would seek to parry the dangerous
blow, the notary said, frigidly, to Sarah:

"You have given me, madame, until to-morrow at noon; I give you until
the next day to renounce a plot whose serious nature you do not seem to
have contemplated. If, between this and then, I do not receive from you
a letter informing me that you have abandoned this criminal and crazy
enterprise, you will learn to your cost that Justice knows how to
protect honest people who refuse guilty associations, and what may
happen to the concoctors of hateful machinations."

"You mean to say, sir, that you ask from me one more day to reflect on
my proposals? That is a good sign, and I grant the delay. The day after
to-morrow, at this hour, I will come here again, and it shall be between
us peace or war,--I repeat it,--but a 'war to the knife,' without mercy
or pity."

And Sarah left the room.

       *       *       *       *       *

"All goes well," she said. "This miserable girl, in whom Rodolph
capriciously takes so much interest, and has sent to the farm at
Bouqueval, in order, no doubt, to make her his mistress hereafter, is no
longer to be feared,--thanks to the one-eyed woman who has freed me from
her. Rodolph's adroitness has saved Madame d'Harville from the snare
into which I meant she should fall; but it is impossible that she can
escape from the fresh plot I have laid for her, and thus she must be for
ever lost to Rodolph. Thus, saddened, discouraged, isolated from all
affection, will he not be in a frame of mind such as will best suit my
purpose of making him the dupe of a falsehood to which, by the notary's
aid, I can give every impress of truth? And the notary will aid me, for
I have frightened him. I shall easily find a young orphan girl,
interesting and poor, who, taught her lesson by me, will fill the
character of our child so bitterly mourned by Rodolph. I know the
expansiveness, the generosity of his heart,--yes, to give a name, a rank
to her whom he will believe to be his daughter, till now forsaken and
abandoned, he will renew those bonds between us which I believed
indissoluble. The predictions of my nurse will be at length realised,
and I shall thus and then attain the constant aim of my life,--a crown!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Sarah had scarcely left the notary before M. Charles Robert entered,
after alighting from a very dashing cabriolet. He went like a person on
most intimate terms to the private room of Jacques Ferrand.

The commandant, as Madame Pipelet called him, entered without ceremony
into the notary's cabinet, whom he found in a surly, bilious mood, and
who thus accosted him:

"I reserve the afternoon for my clients; when you wish to speak to me
come in the morning, will you?"

"My dear lawyer" (this was a standing pleasantry of M. Robert), "I have
a very important matter to talk about in the first place, and, in the
next, I was anxious to assure you in person against any alarms you might
have--"

"What alarms?"

"What! Haven't you heard?"

"What?"

"Of my duel--"

"Your duel?"

"With the Duke de Lucenay. Is it possible you have not heard of it?"

"Quite possible."

"Pooh! pooh!"

"But what did you fight about?"

"A very serious matter, which called for bloodshed. Only imagine that,
at a very large party, M. de Lucenay actually said that I had a phlegmy
cough!"

"That you had--"

"A phlegmy cough, my dear lawyer; a complaint which is really most
ridiculously absurd!"

"And did you fight about that?"

"What the devil would you have a man fight about? Can you imagine that a
man could stand calmly and hear himself charged with having a phlegmy
cough? And before a lovely woman, too! Before a little marchioness,
who--who--In a word, I could not stand it!"

"Really!"

"The military men, you see, are always sensitive. My seconds went, the
day before yesterday, to try and obtain some explanation from those of
the duke. I put the matter perfectly straight,--a duel or an ample
apology."

"An ample apology for what?"

"For the phlegmy cough, _pardieu!_--the phlegmy cough that he fastened
on me."

The notary shrugged his shoulders.

"The duke's seconds said, 'We bear testimony to the honourable
character of M. Charles Robert, but M. de Lucenay cannot, ought not, and
will not retract.' 'Then, gentlemen,' replied my seconds, 'M. de Lucenay
is obstinately determined to assert that M. Charles Robert has a phlegmy
cough?' 'Yes, gentlemen, but he does not therefore mean in the slightest
way to impugn the high respectability of M. Charles Robert.' 'Then let
him retract--' 'No, gentlemen, M. de Lucenay acknowledges M. Robert as a
most decidedly worthy gentleman, but still asserts that he has a phlegmy
cough.' You see there was no means of arranging so serious an affair."

"To be sure not. You were insulted in the point which a man holds
dearest."

"Wasn't I? Well, time and place were agreed on; and yesterday morning we
met at Vincennes, and everything passed off in the most honourable
manner possible. I touched M. de Lucenay slightly in the arm, and the
seconds declared that honour was satisfied. Then the duke, with a loud
voice, said, 'I never retract before a meeting, but, afterwards, it is a
very different thing. It is, therefore, my duty, and my honour impels me
to declare, that I falsely accused M. Charles Robert of having a phlegmy
cough. Gentlemen, I not only declare that my honourable opponent had not
a phlegmy cough, but I trust he never will have one.' Then the duke
extended his hand in the most cordial manner, saying,'Are you now
satisfied?' 'We are friends through life and death,' I replied; and it
was really due to him to say so. The duke has behaved to perfection.
Either he might have said nothing, or contented himself with declaring
that I had not the phlegmy cough. But to express his wish that I might
never have it, was a most delicate attention on his part."

"This is what I call courage well employed! But what do you want?"

"My dear cashkeeper" (this was another of M. Robert's habitual
pleasantries), "it is a matter of great importance to me. You know
that, according to our agreement, I have advanced to you three hundred
and fifty thousand francs (14,000_l._) to complete a particular payment
you had; and it was stipulated that I was to give you three months'
notice of my wish to withdraw that money, the interest of which you pay
me regularly."

"Go on."

"Well," said M. Robert, hesitatingly, "I--no--that is--"

"What?"

"Why, it is only a whim of becoming a landed proprietor."

"Come to the point, pray! You annoy me."

"In a word, then, I am anxious to become a landed proprietor. And, if
not inconvenient to you, I should like--that is I should wish--to have
my funds now in your hands; and I came to say so."

"Ah, ah!"

"That does not offend you, I hope?"

"Why should I be offended?"

"Because you might think--"

"I might think--?"

"That I am the echo of certain reports--"

"What reports?"

"Oh, nothing. Mere folly."

"But, tell me--"

"Oh, there can be no certainty in the gossip about you!"

"What gossip?"

"Oh, it is false from beginning to end. But there are chatterers who say
that you are mixed up in some unpleasant transactions. Idle gossip, I am
quite certain. It is just the same as the report that you and I
speculated on the Exchange together. These reports soon died away. For I
will always say that--"

"So you suppose that your money is not safe with me?"

"Oh, no--no! But, at this moment, I should like to have it in my own
hands."

"Wait a moment." M. Ferrand shut the drawer of his bureau, and rose.

"Where are you going, my dear cashkeeper?"

"To fetch what will convince you of the truth of the reports as to the
embarrassment of my affairs," said the notary, ironically; and, opening
the door of a small private staircase, which enabled him to go into the
pavilion at the back without passing through the office, he disappeared.
He had scarce left the room, when the head clerk rapped again.

"Come in," said Charles Robert.

"Is not M. Ferrand here?"

"No, my worthy pounce and parchment" (another joke of M. Robert).

"There is a lady with a veil on, who wishes to see my employer this
moment on a very urgent affair."

"Worthy quill-driver, the excellent employer will be here in a moment,
and I will inform him. Is the lady handsome?"

"One must be very keen-sighted to discover; for she has on a black veil,
so thick that it is impossible to see her face."

"Really, really, I will make her show her face as I go out. I'll tell
the governor as soon as he returns."

The clerk left the room.

"Where the devil has the attorney at law vanished?" said M. Charles
Robert. "To examine the state of his finances, no doubt. If these
reports are groundless, so much the better. And, when all is said and
done, they can but be false reports. Men of Jacques Ferrand's honesty
always have so many people jealous of them! Still, at the same time, I
should just as well like to have my own cash. I will certainly buy the
château in question. There are towers and Gothic turrets quite _à la
Louis Quatorze_, the real _renaissance_, and, in a word, all that is
most _rococo_. It would give me a kind of landed proprietor's sort of
air which would be capital. It would not be like my _amour_ with that
flirt of a Madame d'Harville. Has she really cut me? Can she really have
given me the 'go-by?' No, no! I am not trifled with as that stupid
porteress in the Rue du Temple, with her bob-wig, says. Yet this
agreeable little flirtation has cost me at least one thousand crowns.
True, the furniture is left, and I have quite enough in my power to
compromise the marchioness. But here comes the lawyer!"

M. Ferrand returned, holding in his hands some papers, which he handed
to M. Charles Robert.

"Here," said he, "are three hundred and fifty thousand francs in
bank-bills. In a few days we will balance the account of interest. Give
me a receipt."

"What!" exclaimed M. Robert, astonished; "do not go to think that--"

"I don't think anything."

"But--"

"The receipt!"

"Dear cashkeeper!"

"Write it; and tell the persons who talk to you of my embarrassments,
how I reply to such suspicions."

"The fact is that, as soon as they hear this, your credit will be more
solid than ever. But, really, take the money back again; I do not want
it at this moment. I told you it was three months hence."

"Monsieur Charles Robert, no man suspects me twice."

"You are angry?"

"The receipt,--the receipt!"

"Man of iron, that you are!" said M. Charles Robert. "There!" he added,
writing the receipt. "There is a lady, closely veiled, who desires to
speak to you directly on a very urgent affair. Won't I have a good look
at her as I go out! There's your receipt; is it all right?"

"Quite. Now I'll thank you to go out this way."

"And so not see the lady?"

"Precisely so."

And the notary rang; and when the chief clerk made his appearance, he
said:

"Ask the lady to walk in. Good day, M. Robert."

"Well, I see I must give up the chance of seeing her. Don't bear malice,
lawyer. Believe me, if--"

"There--there; that'll do. Good-bye." And the notary shut the door on M.
Charles Robert.

After the lapse of a few moments, the chief clerk introduced the Duchess
de Lucenay, very simply attired, wearing a large shawl, and her features
entirely concealed by a thick veil of black lace, depending from her
watered silk bonnet of the same colour.

Madame de Lucenay, a good deal agitated, walked slowly towards the
notary's bureau, who advanced a few paces to meet her.

"Who are you, madame; and what may be your business with me?" said
Jacques Ferrand, abruptly; for Sarah's menaces and M. Charles Robert's
suspicions had a good deal ruffled him. Moreover, the duchess was clad
so simply, that the notary did not see any reason why he should not be
rude. As she did not immediately reply, he continued, abruptly:

"Will you be so kind as to inform me, madame?"

"Sir," she said, in a faltering voice, and endeavouring to conceal her
face in the folds of her veil, "Sir, may I entrust you with a secret of
extreme importance?"

"You may trust me with anything, madame. But it is requisite that I
should know and see to whom I speak."

"That, sir, perhaps, is not necessary. I know that you are probity and
honour itself--"

"To the point, madame,--to the point. I have some one waiting for me.
Who are you?"

"My name is of no consequence, sir. One--of--my friends,--a
relative,--has just left you."

"His name?"

"M. Florestan de Saint-Remy."

"Ah!" said the notary; and he cast a scrutinising and steadfast glance
on the duchess. Then he added, "Well, madame?"

"M. de Saint-Remy has told me--all,--sir!"

"What has he told you, madame?"

"All!"

"What all?"

"Sir; you know--"

"I know many things about M. de Saint-Remy."

"Alas, sir, this is a terrible thing!"

"I know many terrible things about M. de Saint-Remy."

"Oh, sir, he was right when he told me that you were pitiless."

"For swindlers and forgers like him,--yes, I am pitiless. So this
Saint-Remy is a relative of yours? Instead of owning it, you ought to
blush at it. Do you mean to try and soften me with your tears? It is
useless,--not to add that you have undertaken a very disgraceful task
for a respectable female."

At this coarse insolence the pride and patrician blood of the duchess
revolted. She drew herself up, threw back her veil; and then, with a
lofty air, imperious glance, and firm voice, said:

"I am the Duchess de Lucenay, sir!"

The lady then assumed the lofty look of her station; and her appearance
was so imposing that the notary, controlled, fascinated, receded a pace,
quite overcome, took off mechanically the black silk cap that covered
his cranium, and made a low bow.

In truth, nothing could be more charming and aristocratic than the face
and figure of Madame de Lucenay, although she was turned thirty, and her
features were pale and somewhat agitated. But then she had full, brown
eyes, sparkling and bold; splendid black hair; a nose thin and arched;
a lip red and disdainful; a dazzling complexion; teeth of ivory; and a
form tall and slender, graceful, and full of distinction,--the carriage
of a goddess in the clouds, as the immortal Saint-Simon says. With her
hair powdered, and a costume of the eighteenth century, Madame de
Lucenay would have represented, physically and morally, one of those gay
and careless duchesses of the Regency who carried on their flirtations
(or worse) with so much audacity, giddiness, and real kindness of heart,
who confessed their peccadilloes from time to time with so much candour
and naïveté, that the most punctilious said, with a smile, "She is,
doubtless, light and culpable; but she is so kind--so delightful; loves
with so much intensity, passion, and fidelity,--as long as she does
love,--that we cannot really be angry with her. After all, she only
injures herself, and makes so many others happy!" Except the powder and
the large skirts to her dress, such also was Madame de Lucenay, when not
depressed by sombre thoughts. She entered the office of M. Jacques
Ferrand like a plain tradesman's wife; in the instant she came forth as
a great, proud, and irritated lady. Jacques Ferrand had never in his
life seen a woman of such striking beauty,--so haughty and bold, and so
noble in her demeanour. The look of the duchess, her glorious eyes,
encircled with an imperceptible bow of azure, her rosy nostrils, much
dilated, betokened her ardent nature.

Although old, ugly, ignoble, and sordid, Jacques Ferrand was as capable
as any one of appreciating the style of beauty of Madame de Lucenay. The
hatred and rage which the notary felt against M. de Saint-Remy was
increased by the admiration which his proud and lovely mistress inspired
in him. Devoured by all his repressed passions, he said to himself, in
an agony of rage, that this gentleman forger, whom he had compelled
almost to fall at his feet when he threatened him with the assizes,
could inspire such love in such a woman that she actually risked the
present step in his behalf, which might prove fatal to her reputation.
As he thus thought, the notary felt his boldness, which had been for a
moment paralysed, restored to him. Hatred, envy, a kind of savage and
burning resentment, lighted up his eyes, his forehead, and his cheeks.
Seeing Madame de Lucenay on the point of commencing so delicate a
conversation, he expected from her caution and management. What was his
astonishment! She spoke with as much assurance and haughtiness as if she
were discoursing about the simplest thing in the world; and as if,
before a man of his sort, she had no care for reserve or those
concealments which she would assuredly have maintained with her equals.
In fact, the coarse brutality of the notary wounded her to the quick,
and had led Madame de Lucenay to quit the humble and supplicating part
she was acting with much difficulty to herself. Returned to herself, she
thought it beneath her to descend to the least concealment with a mere
scribbler of acts and deeds. High-spirited, charitable, generous,
overflowing with kindness, warm-heartedness, and energy, in spite of her
faults,--but the daughter of a mother of no principle, and who had even
disgraced the noble and respectable, though fallen position of an
_émigrée_,--Madame de Lucenay, in her inborn contempt for certain
classes, would have said with the Roman empress who took her bath in the
presence of a male slave, "He is not a man!"

"Monsieur Notary," said the duchess, with a determined air, to Jacques
Ferrand, "M. de Saint-Remy is one of my friends, and has confided to me
the embarrassment under which he is at this moment suffering, from a
twofold treachery of which he is the victim. All is arranged as to the
money. How much is required to terminate these miserable annoyances?"

Jacques Ferrand was actually aghast at this cavalier and deliberate
manner of entering on this affair.

"One hundred thousand francs are required," he repeated, after having in
some degree surmounted his surprise.

"You shall have your one hundred thousand francs; so send, at once,
these annoying papers to M. de Saint-Remy."

"Where are the one hundred thousand francs, Madame la Duchesse?"

"Have I not said you should have them, sir?"

"I must have them to-morrow, and before noon, madame; or else
proceedings will be instantly commenced for the forgery."

"Well, do you pay this sum, which I will repay to you."

"But madame, it is impossible."

"But, sir, you will not tell me, I imagine, that a notary, like you,
cannot find one hundred thousand francs by to-morrow morning?"

"On what securities, madame?"

"What do you mean? Explain!"

"Who will be answerable to me for this sum?"

"I will."

"Still, madame--"

"Need I say that I have an estate four leagues from Paris, which brings
me in eighty thousand francs (3,200_l._) a year? That will suffice, I
should think, for what you call your securities?"

"Yes, madame, when the mortgage is properly secured."

"What do you mean? Some formality of law, no doubt? Do it, sir, do it."

"Such a deed cannot be drawn up in less than a fortnight, and we must
have your husband's assent, madame."

"But the estate is mine, and mine only," said the duchess, impatiently.

"No matter, madame, you have a husband; and mortgage deeds are very long
and very minute."

"But, once again, sir, you will not ask me to believe that it is so
difficult to find one hundred thousand francs in two hours?"

"Then, madame, apply to the notary you usually employ, or your steward;
as for me, it is impossible."

"I have my reasons for keeping this secret," said Madame de Lucenay,
haughtily. "You know the rogues who seek to take advantage of M. de
Saint-Remy, and that is the reason why I address myself to you."

"Your confidence does me much honour, madame; but I cannot do what you
ask of me."

"You have not this sum?"

"I have much more than that sum, in bank-notes or bright and good gold,
here in my chest."

"Then why waste time about it? You require my signature, I suppose?
Well, let me give it to you, and let us end the matter."

"Even admitting, madame, that you were Madame de Lucenay--"

"Come to the Hôtel de Lucenay in one hour, sir, and I will sign whatever
may be requisite."

"And will the duke sign, also?"

"I do not understand, sir."

"Your signature, alone, would be worthless to me, madame."

Jacques Ferrand delighted, with cruel joy, in the manifest impatience of
the duchess, who, under the appearance of coolness and hauteur,
repressed really painful agony.

For an instant she was at her wits' end. On the previous evening, her
jeweller had advanced her a considerable sum on her jewels, some of
which had been confided to Morel, the lapidary. This sum had been
employed in paying the bills of M. de Saint-Remy, and thus disarming the
other creditors; M. Dubreuil, the farmer of Arnouville, was more than a
year's rent in advance on the farm; and, then, the time was so
pressing. Still more unfortunately for Madame de Lucenay, two of her
friends, to whom she could have had recourse in this moment of distress,
were then absent from Paris. In her eyes, the viscount was innocent of
the forgery. He had said, and she had believed him, that he was the
victim of two rogues; but yet his position was not the less terrible. He
accused! He led to prison! And, even if he took flight, his name would
be no less dishonoured by the suspicion that would light on him. At
these distressing thoughts, Madame de Lucenay trembled with affright.
She blindly loved this man, at the same time so degraded, and gifted
with such strong seductive powers; and her passion for him was one of
those affections which women, of her character and her temperament,
ordinarily experience when they attain an age of maturity.

Jacques Ferrand carefully watched every variation in the physiognomy of
Madame de Lucenay, who seemed to him more lovely and attractive at every
moment, and awakened still more his ardent feeling. Yet he felt a fierce
pleasure in tormenting, by his refusals, this female, who could only
entertain disgust and contempt for him. The lady had spurned the idea of
saying a word to the notary that might seem like a supplication; yet,
when she found the uselessness of other attempts, which she had
addressed to him who alone could save M. de Saint-Remy, she said, at
length, trying to repress all evidence of emotion:

"Since you have the sum of money which I ask of you, sir, and my
guarantee is sufficient, why do you refuse it to me?"

"Because men have their caprices, as well as ladies, madame."

"Well, what is this caprice which thus impels you to act against your
own interest? For I repeat, sir, that whatever may be your conditions, I
accept them."

"You will accept all my conditions, madame?" said the notary, with a
singular expression.

"All,--two, three, four thousand francs, more, if you please. For you
must know, sir," added the duchess, in a tone almost confidential, "I
have no resource but in you, sir, and in you only. It will be impossible
for me at this moment to find elsewhere what I require for to-morrow,
and I must have it, as you know,--I must absolutely have it. Thus I
repeat to you that, whatever terms you require for this service, I
accept them; nothing will be a sacrifice to me,--nothing."

The breath of the notary became thick, and, in his ignoble blindness, he
interpreted the last words of Madame de Lucenay in an unworthy manner.
He saw, through his darkened understanding, a woman as bold as some of
the females of the old court,--a woman driven to her wits' end for fear
of the dishonour of him whom she loved, and capable, perhaps, of any
sacrifice to save him. It was even more stupid than infamous to think
so, but, as we have said already, Jacques Ferrand sometimes, though
rarely, forgot himself.

He quitted his chair abruptly, and approached Madame de Lucenay, who,
surprised, rose when he did, and looked at him with much astonishment.

"Nothing will be a sacrifice to you, say you? To you, who are so
lovely?" he exclaimed, with a voice trembling and broken with agitation,
as he went towards the duchess. "Well, then, I will lend you this sum,
on one condition,--one condition only,--and I swear to you--"

He could not finish his declaration.

By one of those singular contradictions of human nature, at the sight of
the singularly ugly features of M. Ferrand, at the strange and whimsical
thoughts which arose in Madame de Lucenay's mind, at his ridiculous
pretensions, which she guessed in spite of her disquietude and anxiety,
she burst into a fit of laughter, so hearty, so loud, and so excessive,
that the disconcerted notary reeled back. Then, without allowing him a
moment to utter another word, the duchess gave way still more to her
increasing mirth, lowered her veil, and, between two bursts of
irrepressible laughter, she said to the notary, overwhelmed by hatred,
rage, and fury:

"Really, I should much rather prefer asking this advance from M. de
Lucenay."

She then left the room, laughing so heartily that, even when the door of
his room was closed, the notary heard her still.

Jacques Ferrand no sooner recovered his reason than he cursed his
imprudence; but he became reassured on reflecting that the duchess could
not allude to this adventure without compromising herself. Still, the
day had been unpropitious, and he was plunged in thought when the door
of his study opened, and Madame Séraphin entered in great agitation.

"Ah, Ferrand," she exclaimed, "you were right when you declared that,
one day or other, we should be ruined for having allowed her to live!"

"Who?"

"That cursed little girl!"

"What do you mean?"

"A one-eyed woman, whom I did not know, and to whom Tournemine gave the
little chit to get rid of her, fourteen years ago, when we wished to
make her pass for dead--Ah, who would have thought it!"

"Speak! Speak! Why don't you speak?"

"This one-eyed woman has been here, was down-stairs just now, and told
me that she knew it was I who had delivered up the little brat."

"Malediction! Who could have told her? Tournemine is at the galleys."

"I denied it, and treated the one-eyed woman as a liar. But bah! she
declares she knows where the girl is now, and that she has grown up,
that she has her, and that it only depends on her to discover
everything."

"Is hell, then, unchained against me to-day?" exclaimed the notary, in a
fit of rage. "What shall I say to this woman? What shall I offer her to
hold her tongue? Does she seem well off?"

"As I treated her like a beggar, she shook her hand-basket, and there
was money inside of it."

"And she knows where this young girl is now?"

"So she says."

"And she is the daughter of the Countess Sarah Macgregor!" said the
stupefied notary; "and just now she offered me so much to declare that
her daughter was not dead; and the girl is alive, and I can restore her
to her mother! But, then, the false register of her death! If a search
were made, I am ruined! This crime may put others on the scent."

After a moment's silence, he said to Madame Séraphin:

"This one-eyed woman knows where the child is?"

"Yes."

"And the woman will call again?"

"To-morrow."

"Write to Polidori, to come to me this evening, at nine o'clock."

"What! Will you rid yourself of the young girl and the old woman, too?
Ferrand, that will be too much at once!"

"I bid you write to Polidori, to come here this evening, at nine
o'clock!"

       *       *       *       *       *

At the end of this day, Rodolph said to Murphy: "Desire M. de Graün to
despatch a courier this instant; Cecily must be in Paris in six days."

"What! that she-devil again? The diabolical wife of poor David, as
beautiful as she is infamous! For what purpose, monseigneur?"

"For what purpose, Sir Walter Murphy? Ask that question, in a month
hence, of the notary, Jacques Ferrand."




CHAPTER VI.

THE ANONYMOUS LETTER.


Towards ten o'clock in the evening of the same day in which
Fleur-de-Marie was carried off by the Chouette and Schoolmaster, a man
on horseback arrived at the Bouqueval farm, representing himself as
coming from M. Rodolph to tranquillise Madame Georges as to the safety
of her young friend, and to assure her of her safe return ere long. The
man further stated that M. Rodolph, having very important reasons for
making the request, particularly desired no letters might be addressed
to him at Paris for the present; but that, in the event of Madame
Georges having anything particular to communicate, the messenger now
sent would take charge of it, and deliver it punctually.

This pretended envoy on the part of Rodolph was, in fact, an emissary
sent by Sarah, who, by this stratagem, effected the twofold purpose of
quieting the apprehensions of Madame Georges and also obtaining a delay
of several days ere Rodolph learned that the Goualeuse had been carried
off; during which interval Sarah hoped to have induced the notary,
Jacques Ferrand, to promote her unworthy attempt to impose a
supposititious child on Rodolph, after the manner which has already been
related. Nor was this all the evil planned by the countess; she ardently
desired to get rid of Madame d'Harville, on whose account she
entertained very serious misgivings, and whose destruction she had so
nearly compassed, but for the timely interposition of Rodolph.

On the day following that in which the marquis followed his wife into
the house in the Rue du Temple, Tom repaired thither, and, by skilfully
drawing Madame Pipelet into conversation, contrived to learn from her
how a young and elegantly dressed lady, upon the point of being
surprised by her husband, had been preserved through the presence of
mind and cleverness of a lodger in the house, named M. Rodolph.

Once informed of this circumstance, and possessing no positive proof of
the assignation made by Clémence with M. Charles Robert, Sarah conceived
a plan evidently more hateful than the former: she resolved to despatch
a second anonymous letter to M. d'Harville, calculated to bring about a
complete rupture between himself and Rodolph; or, failing that, to
infuse into the mind of the marquis suspicions so unworthy of his wife
and friend as should induce him to forbid Madame d'Harville ever
admitting the prince into her society.

This black and malignant epistle was couched in the following terms:

    "... You have been grossly deceived the other day; your wife,
    being apprised of your following her, invented a tale of
    imaginary beneficence; the real purpose of her visit to the Rue
    du Temple was to fulfil an assignation with an august personage,
    who has hired a room on the fourth floor in the house situated
    Rue du Temple,--this illustrious individual being known only at
    his lodging under the simple name of Rodolph. Should you doubt
    these facts, which may probably appear to you too improbable to
    deserve credit, go to No. 17 Rue du Temple, and make due
    inquiries; obtain a description of the face and figure of the
    august personage alluded to; and you will be compelled to own
    yourself the most credulous and easily duped husband that was
    ever so royally supplanted in the affections of his wife.
    Despise not this advice, if you would not have the world believe
    you carry your devotion to your prince rather too far."

This infamous concoction was put into the post by Sarah herself, about
five o'clock in the afternoon of the day which had witnessed her
interview with the notary.

On this same day, after having given renewed directions to M. de Graün
to expedite the arrival of Cecily in Paris by every means in his power,
Rodolph prepared to pass the evening with the Ambassadress of ----, and
on his return to call on Madame d'Harville, for the purpose of informing
her he had found a charitable intrigue worthy even of her coöperation.

We shall now conduct our readers to the hôtel of Madame d'Harville. The
following dialogue will abundantly prove that, in adopting a tone of
kind and gentle conciliation towards a husband she had hitherto treated
with such invariable coldness and reserve, the heart of Madame
d'Harville had already determined to practise the sound and virtuous
sentiments dictated by Rodolph. The marquis and his lady had just
quitted the dinner-table, and the scene we are about to describe took
place in the elegant little salon we have already spoken of. The
features of Clémence wore an expression of kindness almost amounting to
tenderness, and even M. d'Harville appeared less sad and dejected than
usual. It only remains to premise that the marquis had not as yet
received the last infamous production of the pen of Sarah Macgregor.

"What are your arrangements for this evening?" inquired M. d'Harville,
almost mechanically, of his wife.

"I have no intention of going out. And what are your own plans?"

"I hardly know," answered he, with a sigh. "I feel more than ordinarily
averse to gaiety, and I shall pass my evening, as I have passed many
others, alone."

"Nay, but why alone, since I am not going out?"

M. d'Harville gazed at his wife as though unable to comprehend her. "I
am aware," said he, "that you mentioned your intention to pass this
evening at home; still, I--"

"Pray go on, my lord."

"I did not imagine you would choose to have your solitude broken in
upon. I believe you have always expressed a wish to be alone when you
did not receive company?"

"Perhaps I may have done so," said Clémence, with a smile; "but let me,
for once, plead my sex's privilege of changing my mind, and so, even at
the risk of astonishing you by my caprice, I will own that I should
greatly prefer sharing my solitude with you,--that is, if it would be
quite agreeable to you."

"Oh, how very good of you," exclaimed M. d'Harville, with much delight,
"thus to anticipate my most ardent desire, which I durst not have
requested had you not so kindly encouraged me!"

"Ah, my lord, your very surprise is a severe reproach to me."

"A reproach! Oh, not for worlds would I have you so understand me! But
to find you so kindly considerate, so attentive to my wishes, after my
cruel and unjust conduct the other day, does, I confess, both shame and
surprise me; though the surprise is of the most gratifying and
delightful sort."

"Come, come, my lord," said Madame d'Harville, with a smile of heavenly
sweetness, "let the past be for ever forgotten between us."

"Can you, Clémence," said M. d'Harville, "can you bring yourself to
forget that I have dared to suspect you; that, hurried on by a wild,
insensate jealousy, I meditated violence I now shudder to think of?
Still, what are even these deep offences to the greater and more
irreparable wrong I have done you?"

"Again I say," returned Clémence, making a violent effort to command
herself, "let us forget the past."

"What do I hear? Can you,--oh, is it possible you will pardon me, and
forget all the past?"

"I will try to do so, and I fear not but I shall succeed."

"Oh, Clémence! Can you, indeed, be so generous? But no, no,--I dare not
hope it! I have long since resigned all expectation that such happiness
would ever be mine."

"And now you see how wrong you were in coming to such a conclusion."

"But how comes this blessed change? Or do I dream? Speak to me,
Clémence! Tell me I am not deceiving myself,--that all is not mere
illusion! Speak! Say that I may trust my senses!"

"Indeed you may; I mean all I have said."

"And, now I look at you, I see more kindness in your eye,--your manner
is less cold,--your voice tremulous. Oh, tell me, tell me, is this
indeed true? Or am I the sport of some illusion?"

"Nay, my lord, all is true, and safely to be believed. I, too, have need
of pardon at your hands, and therefore I propose that we mutually
exchange forgiveness."

"You, Clémence! You need forgiveness! Oh, for what, or wherefore?"

"Have I not been frequently unkind, unrelenting, and perhaps even cruel,
towards you? Ought I not to have remembered that it required a more than
ordinary share of courage to act otherwise than you did,--a virtue more
than human to renounce the hope of exchanging a cheerless, solitary
life, for one of wedded sympathy and happiness? Alas, when we are in
grief or suffering, it is so natural to trust to the kindness and
goodness of others! Hitherto your fault has been in depending too much
on my generosity; henceforward it shall be my aim to show you, you have
not trusted in vain."

"Oh, go on! Go on! Continue still to utter such heavenly words!"
exclaimed M. d'Harville, gazing in almost ecstasy on the countenance of
his wife, and clasping his hands in fervid supplication. "Let me again
hear you pronounce my pardon, and it will seem as though a new existence
were opening upon me."

"Our destinies are inseparably united, and death only can dissever us.
Believe me, it shall for the future be my study to render life less
painful to you than it has been."

"Merciful Heaven! Do I hear aright? Clémence, can it be you who have
spoken these dear, these enchanting words?"

"Let me conjure you to spare me the pain and humiliation of hearing you
express so much astonishment at my speaking as my duty prompts me to do;
indeed, your reluctance to credit my assertions grieves me more than I
can describe. How cruel a censure does it imply upon my past conduct!
Ah, who will pity and soothe you in your severe trials, if not I? I seem
inspired by some holy voice, speaking within my breast, to reflect upon
my past conduct. I have deeply meditated on all that has happened, as
well as on the future. My faults rise up in judgment against me; but
with them come also the whisperings of my awakened feelings, teaching me
how to repair my past errors."

"Your errors, my poor injured Clémence! Alas, you were not to blame!"

"Yes, I was. I ought frankly to have appealed to your honour to release
me from the painful necessity of living with you as your wife; and that,
too, on the day following our marriage,--"

"Clémence, for pity's sake no more!"

"Otherwise, in accepting my position, I ought to have elevated it by my
entire submission and devotion. Under the circumstances in which I was
placed, instead of allowing my coldness and proud reserve to act as a
continual reproach, I should have directed all my endeavours to console
you for so heavy a misfortune, and have forgotten everything but the
severe affliction under which you laboured. By degrees I should have
become attached to my work of commiseration, and, probably, the very
cares and sacrifices it would have required to fulfil my voluntary duty;
for which your grateful appreciation would have been a rich reward. I
might, at last--But what ails you, my lord? Are you ill? Surely you are
weeping!"

"But they are tears of pure delight. Ah, you can scarcely imagine what
new emotions are awakened in my heart! Heed not my tears, beloved
Clémence; trust me, they flow from an excess of happiness, arising from
those dear words you just now uttered. Never did I seem so guilty in my
own eyes as I now appear, for having selfishly bound you to such a life
as mine!"

"And never did I find myself more disposed to forget the past, and to
bury all reference to it in oblivion; the sight of your gently falling
tears, even, seems to open to me a source of happiness hitherto unknown
to me. Courage! Courage! Let us, in place of that bright and prosperous
life denied us by Providence, seek our enjoyment in the discharge of the
serious duties allotted us. Let us be mutually indulgent and forbearing
towards each other; and, should our resolution fail, let us turn to our
child, and make her the depositary of all our affections. Thus shall we
secure to ourselves an unfailing store of holy, of tranquil joys."

"Sure, 'tis some angel speaks!" cried M. d'Harville, contemplating his
wife with impassioned looks. "Oh, Clémence, you little know the pleasure
and the pain you cause me. The severest reproach you ever addressed
me--your hardest word or most merited rebuke never touched me as does
this angelic devotion, this disregard of self, this generous sacrifice
of personal enjoyment. Even despite myself, I feel hope spring up within
me. I dare hardly trust myself to believe the blessed future which
suggests itself to my imagination."

"Ah, you may safely and implicitly believe all I say, Albert! I declare
to you, by all that is sacred and solemn, that I have firmly taken the
resolution I spoke of, and that I will adhere to it in strictest word
and deed. Hereafter I may even be enabled to give you further pledges of
my truth."

"Pledges!" exclaimed M. d'Harville, more and more excited by a happiness
so wholly unlocked for. "What need have I of any pledges? Do not your
look, your tone, the heavenly expression of goodness which animates your
countenance, the rapturous pulsations of my own heart, all convince me
of the truth of your words? But, Clémence, man, you know, is a creature
not easily satisfied; and," added the marquis, approaching his wife's
chair, "your noble, generous conduct inspires me with the boldness, the
courage, to hope--to hope,--yes, Clémence, to venture to hope for that
which, only yesterday, I should have considered it even worse than
madness to presume to think of."

"For mercy's sake, explain yourself!" said Clémence, alarmed at the
impassioned words and glances of her husband.

"Yes," cried he, seizing her hand, "yes, by dint of tender, untiring,
unwearied love,--Clémence, do you understand me?--I say, by dint of love
such as mine I venture to hope to obtain a return of my affection. I
dare to anticipate being loved by you,--not with a cold, lukewarm
regard, but with a passion ardent as my own for you. Ah, you know not
the real nature of such a love as I would inspire you with! Alas! I
never even dared to breathe it in your ears,--so frigid, so repulsive
were you to me. Never did you bestow on me a look, a word of kindness,
far less make my heart leap with such joy as thrilled through my breast
but now, when your words of sweet and gentle tenderness drew happy tears
from my eyes, and which, still ringing in my ears, make me almost beside
myself with gladness; and, amid the intoxicating delight which floats
through my brain, comes the proud consciousness of having earned even so
rich a reward by the deep, the passionate ardour of my love for you. Oh,
Clémence, when you will let me only tell you half I have suffered,--how
I have writhed in despairing anguish at your coldness, your disdain,
how I have watched and sighed in vain for one encouraging glance,--you
will own that, for patient devotion to one beloved object, I am inferior
to none. Whence arose that melancholy, that avoidance of all society,
our best friends have so fruitlessly sought to rouse me from? Can you
not guess the cause? Ah, it originated in desolation of spirit and
despair of ever obtaining your love. Yes, dearest Clémence, to that
overwhelming dread was owing the sombre taciturnity, the dislike to
company, the desponding gloom, which excited so many different
conjectures. Think, too, how much my sufferings must have been increased
by the fact that she, the beloved object of my heart's idolatry, was my
own,--legally, irrevocably mine,--dwelling beneath the same roof, yet
more completely alienated from me than though we dwelt in the opposite
parts of the earth. But my burning sighs, my bitter tears, reached not
you; or, I feel almost persuaded, they would have moved even you to pity
me. And now it seems to me that you must have divined my sufferings, and
have come, like an angel of goodness as you are, to whisper in my ears
bright promises of days of unclouded happiness. No longer shall I be
doomed to gaze in unavailing yet doting admiration on your graceful
beauty; no more shall I account myself most blessed yet most accursed in
possessing a creature of matchless excellence, whose charms of mind and
body, alas! I am forbidden to consider as mine; but now the envious
barrier which has thus long divided us is about to be withdrawn, and the
treasure my beating heart tells me is all my own will henceforward be
freely, indisputably mine! Will it not, dear Clémence? Speak to me, and
confirm that which the busy throbbings of my joyful heart tell me to
hope for and expect, as the reward of all I have so long endured!"

As M. d'Harville uttered these last words, he seized the hand of his
wife, and covered it with passionate kisses; while Clémence, much
grieved at the mistake her husband had fallen into, could not avoid
withdrawing her hand with a mixture of terror and disgust. And the
expression of her countenance so plainly bespoke her feelings, that M.
d'Harville saw at once the fearful error he had committed. The blow fell
with redoubled force after the tender visions he had so lately conjured
up. A look of intense agony replaced the bright exultation of his
countenance exhibited a little while since, when Madame d'Harville,
eagerly extending her hand towards him, said, in an agitated tone:

"Albert, receive my solemn promise to be unto you as the most tender and
affectionate sister,--but nothing more. Forgive me, I beseech you, if,
inadvertently, my words have inspired you with hopes which can never be
realised."

"Never?" exclaimed M. d'Harville, fixing on his wife a look of
despairing entreaty.

"Never!" answered she. The single word, with the tone in which it was
spoken, proved but too well the irrevocable decision Clémence had
formed.

Brought back, by the influence of Rodolph, to all her nobleness of
character, Madame d'Harville had firmly resolved to bestow on her
husband every kind and affectionate attention; but to love him she felt
utterly out of her power; and to this immutable resolution she was
driven by a power more forcible than either fear, contempt, or even
dislike,--it was a species of repugnance almost amounting to horror.

After a painful silence of some duration, M. d'Harville passed his hand
across his moist eyelids and said, in a voice of bitterness:

"Let me entreat your pardon for the unintentional mistake I have made.
Oh, refuse not to forgive me for having ventured to believe that
happiness could exist for me!"

And again a long pause ensued, broken at last by D'Harville's
vehemently exclaiming, "What a wretch am I!"

"Albert," said Clémence, gently, "for worlds would I not reproach you;
yet is my promise of being unto you the most loving and affectionate of
sisters unworthy any estimation? You will receive from the tender cares
of devoted friendship more solid happiness than love could afford. Look
forward to brighter days. Hitherto you have found me almost indifferent
to your sorrows; you shall henceforward find me all zeal and solicitude
to alleviate them, and eager to share with you every grief or cause of
suffering, whether of body or of mind."

At this moment a servant, throwing open the folding doors, announced:

"His Highness the Grand Duke of Gerolstein."

M. d'Harville started; then, by a powerful effort, recovering his
self-command, he advanced to meet his visitor.

"I am singularly fortunate, madame," said Rodolph, approaching Clémence,
"to find you at home to-night; and I am still more delighted with my
good fortune, since it procures me the pleasure of meeting you, also, my
dear Albert," continued he, turning to the marquis, and shaking him
cordially by the hand.

"It is, indeed, some time since I have had the honour of paying my
respects to your royal highness."

"If the truth must be spoken, my dear Albert," said the prince,
smilingly, "you are somewhat platonic in your friendships, and, relying
on the certain attachment of your friends, care very little about either
giving or receiving any outward proof of affection."

By a breach of etiquette, which somewhat annoyed Madame d'Harville, a
servant here entered the room with a letter for the marquis. It was the
anonymous epistle of Sarah, accusing Rodolph of being the lover of
Madame d'Harville.

The marquis, out of deference for the prince, put away with his hand
the small silver salver presented to him by the servant, saying, in an
undertone:

"Another time,--another time."

"My dear Albert," said Rodolph, in a voice of the most genuine
affection, "why all this ceremony with me?"

"My lord!"

"With Madame d'Harville's permission, let me beg of you to read your
letter without delay."

"I assure you, my lord, it is not of the slightest consequence."

"Again I say, Albert, read your letter all the same for my being here."

"But, my lord, indeed--"

"Nay, I ask you to do so; or, if you will have it, I desire you to read
it immediately."

"If your highness commands it, my duty is obedience," said the marquis,
taking the letter from the salver.

"Yes, I positively command you to treat me as one old friend ought to
treat another." Then turning towards Madame d'Harville, while the
marquis was breaking the seal of the fatal letter, the contents of which
were, of course, unknown to Rodolph, he said, smilingly, to Madame
d'Harville:

"What a triumph for you, madame, to bend this untractable spirit, and
make it bow to your very caprice!"

M. d'Harville having opened Sarah's infamous letter, approached the
wax-lights burning on the mantelpiece, the better to read it. His
features bore no visible mark of agitation as he perused the vile
scrawl. A slight trembling of the hand alone was visible, as, after a
short hesitation, he refolded the paper and placed it in the pocket of
his waistcoat.

"At the risk of passing for a perfect Goth," said he, with a smile, to
Rodolph, "I will ask you to excuse me, my lord, while I retire to reply
to this letter, which is more important than it at first appeared."

"Shall I not see you again this evening?"

"I am fearful I shall not have that honour, my lord; and I trust your
royal highness will condescend to excuse me."

"What a slippery person you are!" cried Rodolph, gaily. "Will you not,
madame, endeavour to prevent his quitting us?"

"Nay, I dare not attempt that your highness has failed to accomplish."

"But seriously, my dear Albert, endeavour to come back as soon as you
have concluded your letter; or, if that is not possible, promise to give
me a few minutes in the morning. I have a thousand things to say to
you."

"Your highness overwhelms me with kindness," answered the marquis, as,
bowing profoundly, he withdrew, leaving Clémence and the prince alone.

"Your husband has some heavy care on his mind," observed Rodolph to the
marquise; "his smile appeared to me a forced one."

"At the moment of your highness's arrival, M. d'Harville was much
excited, and he has had great difficulty in concealing his agitation
from you."

"My visit was, probably, _mal à propos_?"

"Oh, no, my lord! You came just in time to spare me the conclusion of a
most painful conversation."

"Indeed! May I inquire the subject of it?"

"I had explained to M. d'Harville the line of conduct I had determined
to pursue towards him for the future, assuring him of my future sympathy
and affectionate attention to his happiness."

"How happy you must have rendered him by such gratifying words!"

"He did, indeed, at first, seem most truly happy; and so was I,
likewise; for his tears and his joys caused in me a feeling of delight
I never before experienced. Once I fancied I did but indulge a just
revenge each time I addressed to him a reproach or a sarcasm; but it was
a weak and impotent mode of torture, which always recoiled upon myself,
as my better judgment pointed out the unworthiness of such conduct;
while just now how great was the difference! I had inquired of my
husband if he were going out, to which he mournfully replied that he had
no intention of so doing, but should pass the evening alone, as he most
frequently did. Ah, my lord, could you but have seen his surprise when I
offered to be his companion, and how suddenly did the gloomy expression
of his features give place to a bright glow of happiness! Ah, you were
quite right, there is nothing more really delightful than preparing
happy surprises for those around us."

"But how could so much kindness on your part have brought about the
painful conversation you were alluding to just now?"

"Alas, my lord!" said Clémence, blushing deeply, "M. d'Harville, not
satisfied with the hopes I felt myself justified in holding out, allowed
himself to form others of a nature too tender to admit of their being
realised, and in proportion to my consciousness of my utter inability to
respond to such sentiments had been my anxiety not to arouse them; and,
greatly as I had felt touched by the warmth of my husband's gratitude
for my proffered affection, I was even still more terrified and alarmed
by the passionate ardour of his manner and expressions; and when,
carried away by the impetuosity of his feelings, he pressed his lips
upon my hand, a cold shudder pervaded my whole frame, and I found it
impossible to conceal the disgust and alarm I experienced. Doubtless
this manifestation of my invincible repugnance pained him deeply, and I
much lament having been unable to prevent his perceiving my feelings.
But now that the blow has fallen, it will, at least, serve to convince
M. d'Harville of the utter impossibility of my ever being more to him
than the most tender and devoted friend."

"I pity him most sincerely, without being able to blame you in the
slightest degree for the part you have acted. There are certain feelings
which must ever be held sacred. But poor Albert! With his noble,
generous spirit, his frank, confiding nature, his warm, enthusiastic
heart,--if you only knew how long I have been vainly trying to discover
the cause of the hidden melancholy which was evidently preying upon his
health. Well, we must trust to the soothing effects of time and reason.
By degrees he will become more sensible of the value of the affection
you offer him, and he will resign himself as he did before, when he had
not the consolatory hopes you now present to his view."

"Hopes which I solemnly assure you, my lord, it is my fixed
determination to realise in their fullest extent."

"And now let us turn our attention to others who are also called upon to
suffer and taste of heavy sorrows. You know I promised to occupy you in
a charitable work, which should have all the charm of a romance of real
life; and I am here to perform my promise."

"What, already, my lord? Indeed, you rejoice me greatly."

"It was a most fortunate idea of mine to hire the small chamber I told
you of in the Rue du Temple; you can scarcely imagine all the curious
and interesting objects it has made me acquainted with. In the first
place your poor protégées in the garrets are now enjoying that happiness
your presence secured to them. They have still some severe trials to
undergo; but I will not enter upon the painful details at the present
moment. One of these days you shall learn how many direful evils may be
heaped upon one unfortunate family."

"How grateful they must feel towards you!"

"Nay, 'tis your name is ever on their lips, loaded with praises and
blessings."

"Ah, my lord, is it then in my name you have succoured them?"

"To increase the value of the gift, I confess I did presume to name you
as their benefactress. Besides, what have I done more than carry out
your promises?"

"I cannot allow of even this pious fraud, and to-morrow they shall learn
from me whom they have to thank. I will tell them the extent of their
obligations to you."

"Oh, pray do no such thing, or you will spoil all my fine schemes.
Remember that I have a small apartment in the house; that for the sake
of much good I hope to effect, I am anxious to preserve a strict
_incognito_ there. Recollect, also, that the Morels are now beyond the
reach of further distress; and, finally, let me remind you that there
are other claimants for your benevolence. And now for the subject of our
present intrigue. I want your generous aid and assistance in behalf of a
mother and daughter, who from former affluence are at this moment
reduced to the most abject penury, in consequence of having been most
villainously despoiled of their just rights."

"Poor things! And where do these unfortunate beings reside, my lord?"

"I do not know."

"Then how did you become acquainted with their misfortunes?"

"Yesterday I was at the Temple,--perhaps, Madame la Marquise, you do not
know what sort of place the Temple is?"

"Indeed, my lord, I do not."

"It is a bazaar of the most amusing description. Well, I went there for
the purpose of making several purchases in company with a female lodger
who occupies an apartment adjoining my own--"

"Indeed! A female neighbour?"

"Yes, my next-door neighbour on the fourth floor. Don't you recollect I
told you I had a chamber in the Rue du Temple?"

"Pardon me, my lord, I had quite forgotten that circumstance."

"I must tell you that this same neighbour is one of the prettiest little
mantua-makers you ever saw. She is called Rigolette, is for ever
laughing, and never was in love."

"Upon my word, a most uncommon specimen of her class!"

"She even admits that her indifference to the tender passion arises less
from prudence than because she has not time to think about love or
lovers, both of which she says would take up too much of her time; as,
working from twelve to fifteen hours daily, it is with difficulty she
manages to earn twenty-five sous a day, yet on that trifling sum she
lives contentedly."

"Is it possible?"

"Possible! Why, she even launches out into luxuries,--has a couple of
birds, who consume as much food as herself, arranges her chamber with
the most scrupulous and pretty neatness, while her dress would make a
modern belle grow pale with envy."

"And all this effected upon five and twenty sous a day? It is almost
difficult to believe it."

"I assure you my fair neighbour is a pattern of industry, order,
economy, and practical philosophy; and as such I beg to recommend her to
your notice in her capacity of dressmaker, in which she is reported to
have much skill. If you will honour her with your commands, her fortune
will be surely made; although there is no occasion for your carrying
your beneficence so far as to wear the dresses you permit her to make."

"Oh, I will take care to give her employment immediately. Poor girl!
living honestly and contentedly upon a sum squandered by the rich for
the most trifling whim or caprice."

"Well, now then that you have undertaken to interest yourself in my
deserving young neighbour, let us proceed to the little adventure I was
about to relate to you. I went, as I told you, to the Temple with Mlle.
Rigolette in order to purchase many articles necessary for the comfort
of the poor family in the garret, when, accidentally examining the
drawers of an old _secrétaire_ exposed for sale, I found the fragment of
a letter in a female hand, in which the writer bitterly deplored the
destitution to which herself and daughter were exposed in consequence of
the villainy of the person in whose hands their money had been placed. I
inquired of the mistress of the shop how she became possessed of the
piece of furniture in question. She told me it was part of a lot of very
common household goods she purchased of a person still young, who had
evidently disposed of all her effects from stern necessity, and being
without any other means of raising money. Both mother and daughter,
continued my informant, seemed much superior to their condition, and
each bore their distress with a proud yet calm fortitude."

"And do you not know where these poor ladies can be found, my lord?"

"I do not, unfortunately, at the present moment, but I have given
directions to M. de Graün to use every effort to discover them, and, if
needs must be, even to apply to the police for assistance. It is just
probable that the unfortunate parent and child, finding themselves
stripped of their little stock of furniture, may have sought refuge in
some obscure lodging; and if so, there is every chance of discovering
their abode, since the keepers of lodging-houses are obliged to write a
daily report of every fresh inmate they receive."

"What a singular combination of events!" said Madame d'Harville, much
astonished: "Your account is, indeed, a most interesting one."

"You have not heard all yet. In a corner of the fragment of writing
found in the old _secrétaire_, are these words, 'To write to Madame de
Lucenay.'"

"Oh, how fortunate!" exclaimed Madame d'Harville, with much animation.
"No doubt the duchess can tell me all about these unfortunate ladies.
But then," added she, thoughtfully, "I do not see, after all, how we
shall be able to describe them, as we do not even know their name."

"Nay, it will be easy to inquire whether she is acquainted with a widow
still in the prime of life, whose air and manner indicate her being far
superior to her present circumstances, and who has a daughter about
sixteen years of age named Claire. I am sure it was Claire the woman
told me the younger female was called."

"How very strange! That is my child's name; and furnishes an additional
reason for my interesting myself in their misfortunes."

"I forgot to tell you that the brother of this unhappy widow died by his
own hands a very few months ago."

Madame d'Harville was silent for some minutes, as though reflecting
deeply; at length she said:

"If Madame de Lucenay be in any way acquainted with this unfortunate
family, these particulars will be quite sufficient to identify them;
besides which the lamentable end of the brother must have fixed every
circumstance connected with them more strongly in her memory. How
impatient I feel to question the duchess on the subject! I will write
her a note this very evening, begging of her not to go out to-morrow
till I have seen her. Who can these interesting people be? From your
account, my lord, I should say they certainly belong to the higher class
of society, and must, therefore, feel their present distress so much the
more keenly. Alas, to such as they the falling into such utter
destitution must inflict a deeper, keener sting!"

"And all their sufferings have arisen from the knavery of an
unprincipled scoundrel,--a notary, named Jacques Ferrand. But I am in
possession of other acts of villainy on his part equally black with
this."

"That is the name of the person acting as the legal adviser both of my
husband and mother-in-law," exclaimed Clémence; "and, indeed, my lord, I
think you must be mistaken in your opinion of him, for he is universally
regarded as a person of the strictest honour and probity."

"I assure you I have the most irrefragable proofs of what I assert.
Meanwhile let me beg of you to be perfectly silent as to the character I
assign this man, who is as subtle as unprincipled; and the better to
unmask his nefarious practices, it is necessary he should be allowed to
think himself secure from all danger; a few days will enable me to
perfect my schemes for bringing him to a severe reckoning. He it was who
brought such unmerited affliction upon the interesting females I have
been telling you of, by defrauding them of a large sum, which, it
appears, was consigned to his care by the brother of the unfortunate
widow."

"And this money?"

"Was their sole dependence."

"This is, indeed, a crime of the most heinous description!"

"'Tis, indeed, of blackest die," exclaimed Rodolph, "having nothing to
extenuate it, and originating neither in passion nor necessity. The
pangs of hunger will often instigate a man to commit a theft, the thirst
for revenge lead on to murder; but this legal hypocrite is passing rich,
and invested, by common consent, with a character of almost priestly
sanctity, while his countenance and manners are moulded with such
studious art as to inspire and command universal confidence. The
assassin kills you at a blow,--this villain tortures, prolongs your
sufferings, and leaves you, after the death-blow has been inflicted, to
sink under the gnawing agonies of want, misery, and despair. Nothing is
safe from the cupidity of such a man as Ferrand: the inheritance of the
orphan, the hard-earned savings of the laborious poor,--all excite alike
his unprincipled avarice; and that which in other men arises out of the
impulse of the moment is with this wretch the result of a cold and
unrelenting calculation. You entrust him with your wealth,--to see it is
to covet it, and with him to desire is to possess himself, without the
smallest scruple. Totally unheeding your future wretchedness, the
grasping deceiver deprives you of your property, and without a pang
consigns you to beggary and destitution. Suppose that, by a long course
of labour and privations, you have contrived to amass a provision
against the wants and infirmities of old age; well, no sooner is this
cold-blooded hypocrite made the depositary of your little treasure, than
he unhesitatingly appropriates it, leaving you to drag on a miserable
existence, without a morsel of bread but such as the hand of charity
doles out to you. Nor is this all. Let us consider the fearful
consequences of these infamous acts of spoliation. Take the case of the
widow of whom we were speaking just now,--imagine her dying of grief and
a crushed spirit, the results of her heavy afflictions; she leaves a
young and helpless girl to struggle alone in the world,--a weak and
delicate being, whose very loveliness increases her dangers and
difficulties. Without friends or support, unaccustomed to the rough
realities of life, the poor orphan has but to choose between starvation
and dishonour. In an evil hour she falls, and becomes a lost, degraded
creature. And thus Jacques Ferrand, by his dishonest appropriation of
the things committed to his charge, occasions not only the death of the
mother, but the dishonour of the child; he destroys the body of the one
and the soul of the other,--and again, I say, not with the merciful
despatch of the assassin's dagger, but by the slow tortures of lingering
cruelty!"

Clémence listened in profound silence, not unmixed with surprise, at
hearing Rodolph express himself with so much indignation and bitterness.
Accustomed only to witness the most urbane suavity in the tone and
manner of her guest, she felt more than ordinarily struck by his
vehement and excited language; which, however, seemed to show his
intense abhorrence of all crooked and nefarious dealings.

"I must entreat your pardon, madame," said the prince, after a pause,
"for having permitted myself to use so much warmth in the presence of a
lady; but, in truth, I could not restrain my indignation when I
reflected on all the horrible dangers which may overwhelm your future
protégées. But, be assured, it is quite impossible to exaggerate those
fearful consequences brought about by ruin and misery."

"Indeed! Indeed, my lord, you rather merit my thanks, for having so
powerfully and energetically augmented, if possible, the tender pity I
feel for this unfortunate parent, whose heart is, doubtless, wrung with
anguish rather for her young and innocent daughter than for herself. It
is, in truth, a fearful situation. But we shall soon be enabled to
relieve her mind, and rescue her from her present misery, shall we not,
my lord? Oh, yes, I feel assured we shall,--and henceforward their
happiness shall be my care. I am rich,--though not so much so as I could
wish, now that I perceive how worthily wealth may be employed; but
should there be occasion for further aid than I am enabled to afford, I
will apply to M. d'Harville in their behalf. I will render him so happy,
that he shall find it impossible to refuse any of my new caprices, and I
foresee that I shall have plenty of them. You told me, did you not, my
lord, that our protégées are proud? So much the better. I am better
pleased to find them so; for pride under unmerited misfortune always
betokens a great and elevated mind. But I shall be able to overreach
them, for I will so contrive that they shall be relieved from their
present misery without ever guessing to what channel they owe their
deliverance from misery. You think I shall find it difficult to deceive
them? So much the better. Oh, I have my own plans of action, I can
assure you, my lord; and you will see that I shall be deficient neither
in cunning nor address."

"I fully anticipate the most Machiavelian system of ruse and deep
combination," said Rodolph, smiling.

"But we must, first of all, discover where they are. Oh, how I wish
to-morrow were come! When I leave Madame de Lucenay, I shall go directly
to their old residence, make inquiries of their late neighbours, collect
all the information I can, and form my own conclusions from all I see
and hear. I should feel so proud and delighted to work out all the good
I intend to these poor ladies, without being assisted by any person; and
I shall accomplish it,--I feel sure I shall. This adventure affects me
greatly. Poor things! I seem even to feel a livelier interest in their
misfortunes when I think of my own child."

Deeply touched at this charitable warmth, Rodolph smiled with sincere
commiseration at seeing a young creature of scarcely twenty years of
age, seeking to lose, amid occupations so pure and noble, the sense of
the severe domestic afflictions which bore so heavily upon her. The eyes
of Clémence sparkled with enthusiasm, a delicate carnation tinged her
pale cheek, while the animation of her words and gestures imparted
additional beauty to her lovely countenance.

The close and silent scrutiny of Rodolph did not escape the notice of
Madame d'Harville. She blushed, looked down for a few minutes, then,
raising her eyes in sweet confusion, said:

"I see, my lord, you are amused at my girlish eagerness. But, in truth,
I am impatient to taste those sources of delight which are about to gild
an existence hitherto so replete with grief and sadness, and,
unfortunately, so useless to every one. Alas, this was not the life my
early dreams had pictured to me,--the one great passion of life I must
for ever renounce! Though young, I must live, and act, and think, as
though scores of years had passed over my head. Alas, alas!" continued
Clémence, with a sigh, "to me is denied the dear domestic joys my heart
could so fondly have prized." After a minute's pause she resumed: "But
why should I dwell on such vain and fruitless regrets? Thanks to you, my
lord, charity will replace the void left in my heart by disappointed
affection. Already have I owed to your counsels the enjoyment of the
most touching emotions. Your words, my lord, affect me deeply, and
exercise unbounded influence over me. The more I meditate on what you
have advanced, the more I search into its real depth and value, the more
I am struck by its vast power and truth, the more just and valuable does
it appear to me. Then, when I reflect that, not satisfied with
sympathising with sufferings of which you can form no idea from actual
experience, you aid me with the most salutary counsels, and guide me,
step by step, in the new and delightful path of virtue and goodness
pointed out by you to relieve a weary and worn-out heart, oh, my lord,
what treasure of all that is good must your mind contain! From what
source have you drawn so large a supply of tender pity for the woes of
all?"

"Nay, the secret of my sincere commiseration with the woes of others
consists in my having deeply suffered myself,--nay, in still sighing
over heavy sorrows none can alleviate or cure."

"You, my lord! Surely you cannot have tasted thus bitterly of grief and
misfortune?"

"Yes, 'tis even so. I sometimes think that I have been made to taste of
nearly every bitter which fills our cup of worldly sorrows, the better
to fit me for sympathising with all descriptions of worldly trials.
Wounded and sorely afflicted as a friend, a husband, and a parent, what
grief can there be in which I am not qualified to participate?"

"I always understood, my lord, that your late wife, the grand duchess,
left no child?"

"True; but, before I became her husband, I was the father of a daughter,
who died quite young. And, however you may smile at the idea, I can with
truth assert that the loss of that child has poisoned all my subsequent
days. And this grief increases with my years. Each succeeding hour but
redoubles the poignancy of my regrets, which, far from abating, appear
to grow,--strengthen, even as my daughter would have done had she been
spared me. She would now have been in her seventeenth year."

"And her mother," asked Clémence, after a trifling hesitation, "is she
still living?"

"Oh, name her not, I beseech you!" exclaimed Rodolph, whose features
became suddenly overcast at this reference to Sarah. "She to whom you
allude is a vile, unworthy woman, whose feelings are completely buried
beneath the cold selfishness and ambition of her nature. Sometimes I
even ask myself whether it is not better that my child has been removed
by death than for her to have been contaminated by the example of such a
mother."

Clémence could not restrain a feeling of satisfaction at hearing Rodolph
thus express himself. "In that case," said she, "I can imagine how
doubly you must bewail the loss of your only object of affection!"

"Oh, how I should have doted on my child! For it seems to me that, among
princes, there is always mixed up with the affection we bear a son, a
sort of interested regard for the being destined to perpetuate our
race,--a kind of political calculation. But a daughter!--oh, she is
loved for herself alone! And when, alas! one is weary of witnessing the
many fearful pictures of fallen humanity an intercourse with the world
compels us to behold, what joy to turn from the dark pictures of guilt
and crime to refresh ourselves by the contemplation of a young and
innocent mind, and to delight in watching the unfolding of all those
pure and tender feelings so guilelessly true to nature! The proudest,
the happiest mother feels not half the exquisite joy of a father in
observing the gradual development of a daughter's character. A mother
will dwell with far greater rapture on the bold and manly qualities of a
son. For have you never remarked that the cause which still further
cements the doting affection of a mother for her son, or a father for
his daughter, is the feeling of either requiring or bestowing aid and
protection? Thus, the mother looks upon her son in the light of a future
support and protection; while the father beholds in his young and
helpless daughter a weak and fragile creature, clinging to him for
safety, counsel, and protection from all the storms of life."

"True, my lord,--most true!"

"But what avails it thus to dwell on sources of delight for ever lost to
me?" cried Rodolph, in a voice of the deepest dejection. His mournful
tones sunk into the very heart of Clémence, who could not restrain a
tear, which trickled slowly down her cheek. After a short pause, during
which the prince, making a powerful effort to restrain himself, and
feeling almost ashamed of allowing his feelings thus to get the better
of him in the presence of Madame d'Harville, said, with a smile of
infinite sadness, "Your pardon, madame, for thus allowing myself to be
drawn away by the remembrance of my past griefs!"

"I beseech you, my lord, make no apology to me; but, on the contrary,
believe that I most sincerely sympathise with your very natural regrets.
Have I not a right to share your griefs, for have I not made you a
participator in mine? My greatest pain is, that the only consolation I
could offer you would be vain and useless to assuage your grief."

"Not so; the very expression of your kind commiseration is grateful and
beneficial to me; and I find it a relief to disburden my mind, and tell
you all I suffer. But, courage!" added Rodolph, with a faint and
melancholy smile; "the conversation of this evening entirely reassures
me on your account. A safe and healthful path is opened to you, by
following which you will escape the trials and dangers so fatal to many
of your sex, and, still more so, for those as highly endowed as
yourself. You will have much to endure, to struggle against, and contend
with; but in proportion to the difficulties of your position will be
your merit in overcoming them. You are too young and lovely to escape
without a severe ordeal; but, should your courage ever fail you, the
recollection, not only of the good you have done, but also that you
propose to effect, will serve to strengthen your virtuous resolutions,
and arm you with fresh courage."

Madame d'Harville melted into tears.

"At least," said she, "promise me your counsels and advice shall never
fail me. May I depend on this, my lord?"

"Indeed, indeed, you may. Whether near or afar off, believe that I shall
ever feel the most lively interest in your welfare and well-doing; and,
so far as in me lies, will I devote my best services to promote your
happiness, or that of the man whom I glory in calling my dearest
friend."

"Thanks, my lord," said Clémence, drying her tears, "for this consoling
promise. But for your generous aid, I feel too well that my own strength
would fail me. Still I bind myself now, and in your presence,
faithfully and courageously to perform my duty, however hard or painful
that duty may be."

As Clémence uttered these last words, a small door, concealed by the
hangings, suddenly opened; and M. d'Harville, pale, agitated, and
evidently labouring under considerable excitement, appeared before
Madame d'Harville and Rodolph. The latter involuntarily started, while a
faint cry escaped the lips of the astonished wife.

The first surprise over, the marquis handed to Rodolph the letter
received from Sarah, saying:

"Here, my lord, is the letter I but just now received in your presence.
Have the kindness to cast your eyes over it, and afterwards commit it to
the flames."

Clémence gazed on her husband with utter astonishment.

"Most infamous!" exclaimed Rodolph, indignantly, as he finished the
perusal of the vile scrawl.

"Nay, my lord, there is an act more dastardly even than the sending an
anonymous letter; and that act I have committed."

"For the love of heaven, explain yourself!"

"Instead of at once fearlessly and candidly showing you this letter, I
concealed its contents from you. I feigned calmness and tranquillity,
while jealousy, rage, and despair filled my heart. Nor is this all. To
what detestable meanness do you suppose, my lord, my ungoverned passions
led me? Why, to enact the part of a spy,--to hide myself basely and
contemptibly behind this door, to overhear your conversation and espy
your actions. Yes, hate me, despise me as you will, I merit all for
having insulted you by a suspicion. Oh, the writer of these fiendish
letters knew well the culpable weakness of him to whom they were
addressed. But, after all I have heard,--for not a word has escaped me,
and I now know the nature of the interest which attracts you to frequent
the Rue du Temple,--after having, by my mean and unworthy jealousy,
given support to the base calumny by believing it even for an instant,
how can I hope for pardon, though I sue for it upon my knees? Still,
still, I venture to implore from you, so superior to myself in nobleness
and generosity of soul, pity, and, if you can, forgiveness for the wrong
I have done you!"

"No more of this, my dear Albert," said Rodolph, extending his hands
towards his friend with the most touching cordiality; "you have nothing
to ask pardon for. Indeed, I feel quite delighted to find you have
discovered the secrets of Madame d'Harville and myself. Now that all
further restraint is at an end, I shall be able to lecture you as much
and as frequently as I choose. But, what is better still, you are now
installed as the confidant of Madame d'Harville,--that is to say, you
now know what to expect from a heart so pure, so generous, and so noble
as hers."

"And you, Clémence," said M. d'Harville, sorrowfully, to his wife, "can
you forgive me my last unworthy act, in addition to the just causes you
already have to hate and despise me?"

"On one condition," said she, extending her hand towards her husband,
which he warmly and tenderly pressed, "that you promise to aid me in all
my schemes for promoting and securing your happiness!"

"Upon my word, my dear marquis," exclaimed Rodolph, "our enemies have
shown themselves bunglers after all! They have afforded you an
opportunity you might never otherwise have obtained, of rightly
appreciating the tender devotion of your incomparable wife, whose
affection for you, I venture to say, has shone out more brightly and
steadily under the machinations of those who seek to render us
miserable, than amidst all the former part of your wedded life; so that
we are enabled to take a sweet revenge for the mischief intended to be
effected: that is some consolation, while awaiting a fuller atonement
for this diabolical attempt. I strongly suspect the quarter from which
this scheme has emanated; and however patiently I may bear my own
wrongs, I am not of a nature to suffer those offered to my friends to
remain unpunished. This, however, is my affair. Adieu, madame,--our
intrigue is discovered; and you will be no more at liberty to work alone
in befriending your protégées. But, never mind! Before long we will get
up some mysterious enterprise, impossible to be found out; and we will
even defy the marquis, with all his penetration, to know more than we
choose to tell him."

       *       *       *       *       *

After accompanying Rodolph to his carriage with reiterated thanks and
praises, the marquis retired to his apartments without again seeing
Clémence.




CHAPTER VII.

REFLECTIONS.


It would be difficult to describe the tumultuous and opposing sentiments
that agitated M. d'Harville when alone. He reflected with delight on the
detection of the unworthy falsehood charged upon Rodolph and Clémence;
but he was, at the same time, thoroughly convinced that he must for ever
forego the hope of being loved by her. The more Clémence had proved
herself, in her conversation with Rodolph, resigned, full of courage,
and bent on acting rightly, the more bitterly did M. d'Harville reproach
himself for having, in his culpable egotism, chained the lot of his
unhappy young wife to his own. Far from being consoled by the
conversation he had overheard, he fell into a train of sorrowful thought
and indescribable anguish.

Riches, without occupation, bring with them this wretchedness. Nothing
can divert it, nothing relieve it, from the deepest feelings of mental
torture. Not being compulsorily preoccupied by cares for the future or
daily toil, it is utterly exposed to heavy moral affliction. Able to
acquire all that money can purchase, it desires or regrets with intense
violence--

      "What gold could never buy."

The mental torture of M. d'Harville was intense, for, after all, what he
desired was only what was just, and actually legal,--the society, if not
the love, of his wife.

But, when placed beside the inexorable refusal of Clémence, he asked
himself if there was not the bitterest derision in these words of the
law: The wife belongs to her husband.

To what influence, to what means could he have recourse to subdue this
coldness, this repugnance, which turned his whole existence into one
long punishment, since he could not--ought not--would not love any woman
but his wife?

He could not but see in this, as in many other positions of conjugal
life, the simple will of the husband or the wife imperatively
substituted, without appeal or possibility of prevention, for the
sovereign will of the law.

To the paroxysms of vain anger there succeeded a melancholy depression.
The future weighed him down, heavy, dull, and chill. He only saw before
him the grief that would doubtless render more frequent the attacks of
his fearful malady.

"Oh," he exclaimed, at once in tears and despair, "it is my fault,--it
is my fault! Poor, unhappy girl! I deceived her,--shamefully deceived
her! She must,--she ought to hate me; and yet but now she displayed the
deepest interest in me, and, instead of contenting myself with that, my
mad passion led me away, and I became tender. I spoke of my love, and
scarcely had my lips touched her hand than she became startled, and
bounded with fright. If I could for a moment have doubted the invincible
repugnance with which I inspire her, what she said to the prince must
for ever destroy that illusion. Ah, it is frightful,--frightful! By what
right has she confided to him this hideous secret? It is an unworthy
betrayal! By what right?--alas, by the right the victim has to complain
of its executioner! Poor girl! So young,--so loving! All she could find
most cruel to say against the horrid existence I have entailed upon her
was, that such was not the lot of which she had dreamed, and that she
was very young to renounce all hopes of love! I know Clémence, and the
word she gave me,--the word she gave to the prince,--she will abide by
for ever. She will be to me the tenderest of sisters! Well, is not my
position still most enviable? To the cold and constrained demeanour
which existed between us will succeed affectionate and gentle
intercourse, whilst she might have treated me always with icy disdain of
which it was impossible that I could complain. So, then, I will console
myself by the enjoyment of what she offers to me. Shall I not be too
happy then?--too happy? Ah, how weak I am! How cowardly! Is she not my
wife, after all? Is she not mine and mine only? Does not the law
recognise my right over her? My wife refuses, but is not the right on my
side?" he interrupted himself, with a burst of sardonic laughter.

"Oh, yes,--be violent, eh? What, another infamy? But what can I do? For
I love her yet,--love her to madness! I love her and her only! I want
but her,--her love, and not the lukewarm regard of a sister. Ah, at last
she must have pity; she is so kind, and she will see how unhappy I am!
But no, no! Never! Mine is a case of estrangement which a woman never
can surmount. Disgust,--yes, disgust,--I cannot but see it,--disgust! I
must convince myself that it is my horrid infirmity that frightens her,
and always must,--always must!" exclaimed M. d'Harville, in his fearful
excitement.

After a moment of gloomy silence, he continued:

"This anonymous attack, which accused the prince and my wife, comes from
the hand of an enemy; and yet, but an hour ago, before I saw through it,
I suspected him. Him!--to believe him capable of such base treachery!
And my wife, too, I included in the same suspicion! Ah, jealousy is
incurable! And yet I must not abuse myself. If the prince, who loves me
as his best and dearest friend, has made Clémence promise to occupy her
mind and heart in charitable works, if he promises her his advice, his
support, it is because she requires advice, needs support. And, indeed,
lovely and young, and surrounded as she is, and without that love in her
heart which protects and even almost excuses her wrongs through mine,
which are so atrocious, must she not fall? Another torturing thought!
What I have suffered when I thought her guilty,--fallen,--Heaven knows
what agony! But, no; the fear is vain! Clémence has sworn never to fail
in her duties, and she will keep her promise,--strictly keep it! But at
what a price! At what a price! But now, when she turned towards me with
affectionate language, what agony did I feel at the sight of her gentle,
sad, and resigned smile! How much this return to me must have cost! Poor
love! how lovely and affecting she seemed at that moment! For the first
time I felt a fierce remorse, for, up to that moment, her haughty
coldness had sufficiently avenged her. Oh, wretch!--wretch that I am!"

       *       *       *       *       *

After a long and sleepless night, spent in bitter reflections, the
agitation of M. d'Harville ceased, as if by enchantment. He had come to
an unalterable resolution. He awaited daybreak with excessive
impatience.

       *       *       *       *       *

Early in the morning he rang for his _valet de chambre_.

When old Joseph entered his master's room, to his great surprise he
heard him hum a hunting song,--a sign, as rare as certain, that M.
d'Harville was in good humour.

"Ah, M. le Marquis," said the faithful old servant, quite affected,
"what a charming voice you have! What a pity that you do not sing more
frequently!"

"Really, Joseph, have I a charming voice?" said M. d'Harville, smiling.

"If M. le Marquis had a voice as hoarse as a night raven or as harsh as
a rattle, I should still think he had a charming voice."

"Be silent, you flatterer!"

"Why, when you sing, M. le Marquis, it is a sign you are happy, and then
your voice sounds to me the most beautiful music in the world."

"In that case, Joseph, my old friend, prepare to open your long ears."

"What do you mean, sir?"

"You may enjoy every day the music which you call charming, and of which
you seem so fond."

"What! You will be happy every day, M. le Marquis?" exclaimed Joseph,
clasping his hands with extreme delight.

"Every day, my old Joseph, happy every day. Yes, no more sorrow,--no
more sadness. I can tell you, the only and discreet confidant of my
troubles, that I am at the height of happiness. My wife is an angel of
goodness, and has asked my forgiveness for her past estrangement,
attributing it (can you imagine?) to jealousy."

"To jealousy?"

"Yes, absurd suspicions, excited by anonymous letters."

"How shameful!"

"You understand? Women have so much self-love,--a little more and we
should have been separated; but, fortunately, last evening she explained
all frankly to me, and I disabused her mind. To tell you her extreme
delight would be impossible, for she loves me,--oh, yes, she loves me!
The coldness she evinced towards me lay as cruelly on herself as on me,
and now, at length, our distressing separation has ended. Only conceive
my delight!"

"Can it be true?" cried Joseph, with tears in his eyes. "Can it really
be true, M. le Marquis? And now your life will be happy, for it was only
my lady's love that you required, or, rather, since her estrangement was
your sole misery, as you told me."

"And to whom but you should I have told it, my worthy old Joseph? Do
not you possess, also, a still sadder secret? But do not let us say
anything more of sorrows now,--it is too bright a time. You see,
perhaps, that I have been weeping? It is because this happiness has come
over me so suddenly, when I so little anticipated it! How weak I am!--am
I not?"

"Well, well, M. le Marquis, you may weep for joy as much as you please,
for you have wept long enough for pain; and now see, do not I do as you
do? They are right sort of tears, and I would not give them for ten
years more of life. I have now but one fear, and that is, not to be able
to prevent myself from falling at the feet of Madame la Marquise the
first time I see her."

"Silly old fellow! Why you are as weak as your master. And now I have
but one fear."

"And what is that?"

"That this will not last; I am too happy. What now is wanting to me?"

"Nothing,--nothing, M. le Marquis,--absolutely nothing."

"That is why I mistrust such perfect happiness,--too complete."

"Alas! If that is all, why, M. le Marquis--But no, I dare not."

"I understand you. Well, I believe your fears are vain. The change which
my happiness causes me is so intense, so complete, that I am almost sure
of being nearly cured."

"How?"

"My doctor has told me a hundred times that a violent emotion is
frequently sufficient either to bring on or to cure this terrible
malady."

"You are right, monsieur,--you are cured, and what a blessing that is!
Ah, as you say, M. le Marquis, the marquise is a good angel come down
from heaven; and I begin myself to be almost alarmed lest the happiness
is too great; but now I think of it, if you only want a small matter
just to annoy you, thank God, I have just the very thing!"

"What is it?"

"One of your friends has very luckily had a sword-wound, very slight, to
be sure; but that's all the same, it is quite enough for you, as you
desire to make a small black spot in your too happy day."

"What do you mean, and of whom do you speak?"

"The Duke de Lucenay."

"Is he wounded?"

"A scratch in the arm. M. the Duke came yesterday to call on you, sir,
and told me he should come again this morning, and invite himself to a
cup of tea."

"Poor Lucenay! And why did you not tell me this?"

"I could not see you last night, M. le Marquis."

After a moment's reflection, M. d'Harville resumed:

"You are right, this slight regret will, doubtless, satisfy jealous
Fate. But an idea has come across me; I should like to get up a
bachelors' breakfast this morning of all the friends of M. de Lucenay,
to celebrate the fortunate result of his duel; not anticipating such a
meeting, he will be delighted."

"A capital idea, M. le Marquis. _Vive la joie!_ Let us make up for lost
time. For how many shall I desire the _maître d'hôtel_ to lay covers?"

"For six, in the small winter dining-room."

"And the invitations?"

"I will write them. Let a groom get his horse ready, and take them
instantly. It is very early, and he will find everybody at home. Ring."

Joseph rang the bell.

M. d'Harville entered into his cabinet, and wrote the following letter,
with no other alteration than the name of each invited guest.

      "MY DEAR ----: This is a circular, and is also an impromptu.
    Lucenay is coming to breakfast with me this morning, expecting
    only a _tête-à-tête_. Will you join me and several friends, whom
    I also invite, in giving him an agreeable surprise?

      "Twelve punctually.

                                              "M. D'HARVILLE."

A servant entered.

"Desire some one to get on horseback, and deliver these notes directly,"
said M. d'Harville; and then, addressing Joseph, "Write the addresses:
M. le Vicomte de Saint-Remy,--Lucenay cannot get on without him," said
M. d'Harville to himself; "M. de Monville, one of the duke's travelling
companions; Lord Douglas, his beloved partner at whist; the Baron de
Sézannes, one of the friends of his childhood. Have you done?"

"Yes, M. le Marquis."

"Send them off, then, without losing a minute's time," said M.
d'Harville.

"Ah, Philippe, request M. Doublet to come and speak to me."

Philippe left the room.

"Well, what is the matter with you?" inquired M. d'Harville of Joseph,
who looked at him with astonishment.

"I cannot get over it, sir; I never saw you in such spirits,--so lively;
and then you, who are usually so pale, have got such a colour, and your
eyes sparkle."

"Happiness, my old friend,--happiness, and nothing else; and you must
assist me in my little plot. You must go and learn of Mlle. Juliette,
Madame d'Harville's waiting-woman, who has the care of her diamonds."

"Yes, M. le Marquis, it is Mlle. Juliette who has the charge of them,
for it is not eight days since I helped her to clean them."

"Ask her to tell you the name of her lady's jeweller, but not to say a
word on the subject to her mistress."

"Ah, I understand,--a surprise."

"Go as quickly as possible. Here is M. Doublet."

And the steward entered as Joseph quitted the apartment.

"I have the honour to attend the orders of M. le Marquis."

"My dear M. Doublet, I am going to alarm you," said M. d'Harville,
smiling; "I shall compel you to utter fearful cries of distress."

"Me, sir?"

"You."

"I will endeavour to give satisfaction to M. le Marquis."

"I am going to spend an enormous sum, M. Doublet."

"Why not, M. le Marquis? We are well able to do so."

"I have been planning a considerable extent of building. I propose to
annex a gallery in the garden, on the right wing of the hôtel. After
having hesitated at this folly, of which I have not before spoken to
you, I have made up my mind on the point, and I wish you to send to-day
to my architect, desiring him to come and talk over the plans with me.
Well, M. Doublet, you do not seem to object to the outlay."

"I can assure your lordship that I have no objection whatsoever."

"This gallery is destined for fêtes, and I wish to have it erected as
though by enchantment; and, as enchantments are very dear, we must sell
fifteen or twenty thousand livres of income in order to meet the
expenditure, for I wish the work to be begun as speedily as possible."

"I have always said there is nothing which M. le Marquis wants, unless
it be a certain taste. That for building has the advantage of having the
buildings always left; as to money, M. le Marquis need not alarm
himself, and he may, if he pleases, build the gallery."

Joseph returned.

"Here, M. le Marquis, is the address of the jeweller, whose name is M.
Baudoin," said he to M. d'Harville.

"My dear M. Doublet, will you go to this jeweller's, and desire him to
bring here in an hour a river of diamonds, worth, say, two thousand
louis? Women never have too many jewels, now they wear gowns decorated
with them. You can arrange with the jeweller as to the payment."

"Yes, M. le Marquis; and I do not even yet begin to groan. Diamonds are
like buildings,--they remain. And then, no doubt, the surprise will
greatly please Madame la Marquise, without counting the pleasure that
you yourself will experience. It is as I had the honour of saying the
other day, there is not in the world any person whose existence can be
more delightful than that of M. le Marquis."

"My dear M. Doublet," said M. d'Harville, with a smile, "your
congratulations are always so peculiarly apropos."

"That is their only merit, M. le Marquis; and they possess that merit,
perhaps, because they proceed from the heart. I will run to the
jeweller."

As soon as he was alone, M. d'Harville began to pace up and down his
cabinet, with his arms folded, and his eye fixed and meditative. His
features suddenly changed, and no longer expressed that somewhat
feverish contentment of which the steward and his old servant had been
the dupes, but assumed a calm, sad, and chilling resolution. Afterwards,
having paced up and down for a short time, he sunk into a chair heavily,
and, as though weighed down with sorrow, placed his elbows on his desk,
and hid his face in his hands. After a moment he rose suddenly, wiped a
tear which moistened his red eyelid, and said with effort:

"Come, come! Courage, courage!"

He then wrote to several persons on very trifling matters, and postponed
various meetings for some days. The marquis had concluded this
correspondence when Joseph again entered, so gay, and so forgetful of
himself, as to hum a tune in his turn.

"M. Joseph, what a charming voice you have!" said his master, jestingly.

"_Ma foi!_ so much the worse, M. le Marquis, for I don't care about it.
I am singing so merrily within, that my music must be heard without."

"Send these letters to the post."

"Yes, M. le Marquis; but where will you receive the gentlemen who are
expected this morning?"

"Here, in my cabinet; they will smoke after breakfast, and then the
smell of the tobacco will not reach Madame d'Harville."

At this moment the noise of carriage wheels was heard in the courtyard
of the hôtel.

"It is Madame la Marquise going out; she ordered her carriage very early
this morning," said Joseph.

"Run and request her to be so kind and come here before she goes out."

"Yes, M. le Marquis."

The domestic had scarcely left the room when M. d'Harville approached a
mirror, and looked at himself attentively.

"Well, well," said he, in a hoarse voice, "it is there,--the flushed
cheeks--the bright look--joy or fever, it is little consequence which,
so that they are deceived; now, then, for the smile on the lips,--there
are so many sorts of smiles! But who can distinguish the false from the
true? Who can peep beneath the false mask, and say, 'That laugh hides a
dark despair, that noisy gaiety conceals a thought of death?' Who could
guess that? No one,--fortunately, no one,--no one! Ah, yes, love would
never be mistaken; his instinct would enlighten him. But I hear my
wife,--my wife! Now, then, sinister actor, play thy part."

Clémence entered M. d'Harville's apartment.

"Good morrow, dear brother Albert," she said, in a tone full of
sweetness. Then, observing the smiling expression of her husband's
countenance, "But what is it, my dear, that gives you such a smiling
air?"

"It was because, when you entered, my dear sister, I was thinking of
you, and, moreover, I was under the influence of an excellent
resolution."

"That does not surprise me."

"What took place yesterday,--your extreme generosity, the prince's noble
conduct,--has given me much food for reflection, and I am
converted,--entirely converted to your ideas."

"Indeed! That is a happy change!" exclaimed Madame d'Harville. "Ah! I
was sure that, when I appealed to your heart, to your reason, you would
understand me; and now I have no doubt about the future."

"Nor I either, Clémence, I assure you. Yes, since my resolution last
night, the future, which seemed so vague and sombre, is singularly
brightened and simplified."

"Nothing can be more natural, my dear. Now we both go towards the same
end, like a brother and sister, mutually dependent on each other; at the
end of our career we shall find each other what we are to-day. The
feeling will be unalterable. In a word, I wish you to be happy; and you
shall be, for I have resolved it there," said Clémence, placing her
finger on her forehead. Then she added, with charming emphasis, lowering
her hand to her heart, "No, I mistake, it is here. That is the good
thought that will watch over you incessantly, and myself also; and you
shall see, my brother, in what the obstinacy of a devoted heart
consists."

"Dear Clémence!" said M. d'Harville with repressed emotion; then, after
a moment's silence, he continued, in a gay tone:

"I sent to beg you to come here before you went out, to tell you that I
could not take tea with you this morning. I have some friends to
breakfast,--a sort of impromptu,--to celebrate the fortunate result of a
duel of poor Lucenay, who, by the way, was only very slightly wounded by
his adversary."

Madame d'Harville blushed when she reflected on the origin of this
duel,--an absurd remark addressed in her presence by the Duke de Lucenay
to M. Charles Robert. It reminded her of an _erreur_ of which she was
ashamed, and, to escape from the pain she felt, she said to her husband:

"What a singular chance! M. de Lucenay is coming to breakfast with you,
and I am going, perhaps rather indiscreetly, to invite myself this
morning to Madame de Lucenay's; for I have a great deal to say to her
about my two unknowns. From her, it is my intention to go to the prison
of St. Lazare with Madame de Blinval, for you do not know all my
projects; at this time I am intriguing to get admittance into the
workroom of the young prisoner-girls."

"You are really insatiable," said M. d'Harville, with a smile; and then
he added, with a painful emotion, which, despite his efforts, betrayed
itself a little, "Then I shall see you no more to-day."

"Does it annoy you that I should go out so early?" asked Clémence,
quickly, astonished at the tone of his voice. "If you wish it, I can put
off my visit to Madame de Lucenay."

The Marquis had nearly betrayed himself, but continued, in an
affectionate tone:

"Yes, my dear little sister, I am as annoyed to see you go out, as I
shall be impatient to see you return, and these are faults of which I
shall never be corrected."

"And you are quite right, dear; for if you did I should be very, very
sorry."

The sound of a bell, announcing a visit, was now heard.

"Here is one of your guests, no doubt," said Madame d'Harville. "I leave
you; but, by the way, what are you going to do in the evening? If you
have no better engagement, I require you to accompany me to the Italian
Opera; perhaps now you will like the music better."

"I am at your orders with the utmost pleasure."

"Are you going out by and by? Shall I see you before dinner?"

"I shall not go out; you will find me here."

"Well, then, on my return, I shall come and inquire if your bachelors'
breakfast has been amusing."

"Adieu, Clémence!"

"Adieu, dear! We shall soon meet again. I leave you a clear house, and
wish you may be as merry as possible. Be very gay and lively, mind."

Having cordially shaken her husband's hand, Clémence went out of one
door as M. de Lucenay entered by another.

"She wished me to be as merry as possible, and bade me be gay! In the
word adieu, in that last cry of my soul in its agony, in that word of
complete and eternal separation, she has understood that we should meet
again soon,--this evening,--and leaves me tranquilly, and with a smile!
It does honour to my dissimulation. By heaven, I did not think that I
was so good an actor! But here is Lucenay."




CHAPTER VIII.

THE BACHELORS' BREAKFAST.


M. de Lucenay came into the room.

The duke's wound had been so slight, that he did not even carry his arm
in a sling. His countenance was, as usual, mirthful, yet proud; his
motion perpetual; and his restlessness, as usual, unconquerable. In
spite of his awkwardness, his ill-timed pleasantries, and in spite of
his immense nose, which gave his face a grotesque and odd character, M.
de Lucenay was not, as we have already said, a vulgar person, thanks to
a kind of natural dignity and bold impertinence, which never forsook
him.

"How indifferent you must think me to what concerns you, my dear Henry!"
said M. d'Harville, extending his hand to M. de Lucenay; "but it was
only this morning that I heard of your unfortunate adventure."

"Unfortunate! Pooh--pooh, marquis! I had my money's worth, as they say.
I really never laughed so in my life. The worthy M. Robert was so
religiously determined to maintain that he never had a phlegmy cough, in
all his life,--but you do not know! This was the cause of the duel. The
other evening at the ---- embassy, I asked him, before your wife and the
Countess Macgregor, how his phlegmy cough was? _Inde iræ!_ for, between
ourselves, he had nothing of the kind; but it was all the same, and, you
may suppose, to have such a thing alluded to before pretty women was
very provoking."

"How foolish! Yet it is so like you! But who is this M. Robert?"

"_Ma foi!_ I have not the slightest idea in the world. He is a person
whom I met at the Spas; he passed by us in the winter garden at the
embassy, and I called to him to play off this foolish jest, to which he
gallantly replied the next day by giving me a touch with his
sword-point. This is the history of our acquaintance. But let us speak
no more of such follies. I have come to ask you for a cup of tea."

So saying, M. de Lucenay flung himself down full length on the sofa;
after which, poking the point of his cane between the wall and the frame
of a picture hanging over his head, he began to move it about, and try
and balance the frame.

"I expected you, my dear Henry; and I have got up a surprise for you,"
said M. d'Harville.

"Ah, bah! and in what way?" exclaimed M. de Lucenay, giving to the
picture a very doubtful kind of balance.

"You will unquestionably unhook that picture, and let it down on your
head."

"_Pardieu!_ I believe you are right. What an eagle's eye you have! But,
tell me, what is this surprise of yours?"

"I have invited some of our friends to come and breakfast with us!"

"Really! Well, that is capital! Bravo, marquis,--bravissimo!
ultra-bravissimo!" exclaimed M. de Lucenay, in a lusty voice, and
beating the sofa cushions with his cane with all his might. "And who
shall we have,--Saint-Remy? No, I recollect; he has been in the country
for some days. What the devil can he be pattering about in the country
in the mid-winter for?"

"Are you sure he is not in Paris?"

"Quite sure; for I wrote to him to go out with me, and learned he was
absent; and so I fell back upon Lord Douglas, and Sézannes."

"Nothing can be better; they breakfast with us."

"Bravo! bravo! bravo!" exclaimed M. de Lucenay again, with lusty lungs;
and then, wriggling and twisting himself on the sofa, he accompanied his
cries with a series of fishlike bounds and springs, which would have
made a boatman envious. The acrobatic exercises of the Duke de Lucenay
were interrupted by the arrival of M. de Saint-Remy.

"There was no occasion to ask if Lucenay was here," said the viscount,
gaily; "one could hear him below stairs."

"What! Is it you, graceful sylvan, country swain,--wolf of the woods?"
exclaimed the duke, in his surprise, and sitting up suddenly. "I thought
you were in the country!"

"I came back yesterday; and, having this instant received D'Harville's
invitation, I have hastened hither, quite delighted to make one in so
pleasant a surprise." And M. de Saint-Remy extended his hand to M. de
Lucenay, and then to the marquis.

"Let me thank you for your speed, my dear Saint-Remy. Is it not natural?
The friends of Lucenay ought to rejoice in the fortunate result of this
duel, which, after all, might have had very serious results."

"But," resumed the duke, doggedly, "what on earth have you been doing in
the country in the middle of winter, Saint-Remy? It mystifies me."

"How inquisitive he is!" said the viscount, addressing M. d'Harville;
and then, turning to the duke, "I am anxious to wean myself gradually
from Paris, as I am soon to quit it."

"Ah, yes, the beautiful idea of attaching you to the legation from
France to Gerolstein! Pray leave off those silly ideas of diplomacy! You
will never go. My wife says so, everybody says the same."

"I assure you that Madame de Lucenay is mistaken, as well as all the
rest of the world."

"She told you, in my presence, that it was a folly."

"How many have I committed in my life?"

"Yes, elegant, charming follies, true;--such as people said would ruin
you in your Sardanapalian magnificences,--that I admit. But to go and
bury yourself alive in such a court,--at Gerolstein! What an idea! Psha!
It is a folly, an absurdity; and you have too much good sense to commit
absurdities."

"Take care, my dear Lucenay. When you abuse this German court, you will
get up a quarrel with D'Harville, the intimate friend of the grand duke
regnant, who, moreover, received me with the best possible grace at the
embassy, where I was presented to him."

"Really, my dear Henry," said M. d'Harville, "if you knew the grand duke
as I know him, you would understand that Saint-Remy could have no
repugnance to passing some time at Gerolstein."

"I believe you, marquis, although they do say that he is very haughty
and very peculiar, your grand duke; but that will not hinder a don like
Saint-Remy, the finest sifting of the finest flour, from being unable to
live anywhere but in Paris. It is in Paris only that he is duly
appreciated."

The other guests of M. d'Harville now arrived, when Joseph entered, and
said a few words in a low voice to his master.

"Gentlemen," said the marquis, "will you allow me?--it is my wife's
jeweller, who has brought some diamonds to select for her,--a surprise.
You understand that, Lucenay? We are husbands of the old sort, you and
I."

"Ah, _pardieu_! If it is a surprise you mean," shouted the duke, "my
wife gave me one yesterday, and a famous one too!"

"Some magnificent present?"

"She asked me for a hundred thousand francs (4,000_l._)."

"And you are such a magnifico--you--"

"Lent them to her; they are advanced as mortgage on her Arnouville
estate. Right reckonings make good friends,--but that's by the by. To
lend in two hours a hundred thousand francs to a friend who requires
that sum is what I call pretty, but rare. Is it not prodigal, you who
are a connoisseur in loans?" said the duke, laughingly, to Saint-Remy,
little thinking of the cutting purport of his words.

In spite of his effrontery, the viscount blushed slightly, and then
replied, with composure:

"A hundred thousand francs?--that is immense! What could a woman ever
want with such a sum as a hundred thousand francs? As for us men, that
is quite a different matter."

"_Ma foi!_ I really do not know what she could want with such a sum as
that. But that's not my affair. Some arrears for the toilet, probably?
The tradespeople hungry and annoying,--that's her affair. And, as you
know very well, my dear Saint-Remy, that, as it was I who lent my wife
the money, it would have been in the worst possible taste in me to have
inquired the purpose for which she required it."

"Yet," said the viscount, with a laugh, "there is usually a singular
curiosity on the part of those who lend money to know what is done with
it."

"_Parbleu!_ Saint-Remy," said M. d'Harville, "you have such exquisite
taste, that you must help me to choose the ornament I intend for my
wife. Your approbation will consecrate my choice; your decisions are
sovereign in all that concerns the fashion."

The jeweller entered, bringing with him several caskets of gems in a
large leather bag.

"Ah, it is M. Baudoin!" said M. de Lucenay.

"At your grace's service."

"I am sure that it is you who ruined my wife with your dazzling and
infernal temptations," said M. de Lucenay.

"Madame la Duchesse has only had her diamonds reset this winter," said
the jeweller, slightly embarrassed; "and now, as I came to M. le
Marquis, I left them with her grace."

M. de Saint-Remy knew that Madame de Lucenay, to aid him, had changed
her jewels for false stones. He was disagreeably embarrassed at this
rencontre, but said, boldly:

"How curious these husbands are!--don't answer any inquisitive
interrogatories, M. Baudoin."

"Curious; _ma foi!_ no," said the duke; "it is my wife who pays. She can
afford all her whims, for she is much richer than I am."

During this conversation, M. Baudoin had displayed on a table several
superb necklaces of rubies and diamonds.

"What a fine water, and how exquisitely those stones are cut!" said Lord
Douglas.

"Alas, sir!" said the jeweller, "I employed in this work one of the most
skilful lapidaries in Paris, named Morel; but, unfortunately, he has
become insane, and I shall never find such another workman. My matcher
of stones says that, in all probability, it was his wretched condition
that deprived the man of his senses, poor fellow!"

"Wretched condition! What! do you trust diamonds to people in distress?"

"Certainly, sir; and there is no instance of a lapidary having ever
pilfered anything, however miserable and destitute his condition."

"How much for this necklace?" inquired M. d'Harville.

"M. le Marquis will observe that the stones are of a splendid water and
cut, and nearly all of a size."

"These oratorical prefaces threaten your purse," said M. de Saint-Remy,
with a laugh. "Now, my dear D'Harville, look out for a high price."

"Come, M. Baudoin, have a conscience, and ask the price you mean to
take!" said M. d'Harville.

"I will not haggle with your lordship. The lowest price is forty-two
thousand francs (11,680_l._)."

"Gentlemen," exclaimed M. de Lucenay, "let us who are married admire
D'Harville in silence. A man who contrives a surprise for his wife to
the amount of forty-two thousand francs! _Diable!_ we must not noise
that abroad, or it would be a detestable precedent."

"Laugh on, gentlemen, as much as you please," said the marquis, gaily.
"I love my wife, and am not ashamed to confess it; on the contrary, I
boast of it."

"It is plain enough to be seen," said M. de Saint-Remy; "such a present
speaks more eloquently than all the protestation in the world."

"I will take this necklace, then," said M. d'Harville, "if the setting
of black enamel seems to you in good taste, Saint-Remy."

"Oh, it sets off the brilliancy of the stones; it is exquisitely
devised."

"Then this it shall be," said M. d'Harville. "You will settle, M.
Baudoin, with M. Doublet, my man of business."

"M. Doublet told me as much, my lord marquis," said the jeweller, who
quitted the apartment, after having packed up his bag without counting
the jewels which he had brought (such was his confidence), and
notwithstanding M. de Saint-Remy had for a long time and curiously
handled and examined them during the interview.

M. d'Harville gave the necklace to Joseph, who was waiting, and said to
him, in a low tone:

"Mlle. Juliette must put these diamonds cleverly away with those of her
mistress, so that la marquise may not suspect; and then her surprise
will be the greater."

At this moment the _maître d'hôtel_ announced that the breakfast was
ready; and the guests, passing into the dining-room, seated themselves.

"Do you know, my dear D'Harville," said M. de Lucenay, "that this house
is one of the most elegant and best arranged in Paris?"

"It is very convenient, certainly, but we want room; I have a plan to
add a gallery on the garden. Madame d'Harville wishes to give some grand
balls, and our salons are not large enough. Then, I think, nothing is
more inconvenient than the encroachments of fêtes on the apartments one
usually occupies, and from which, on such occasions, you are necessarily
driven."

"I am quite of D'Harville's opinion," said M. de Saint-Remy; "nothing is
more wretched, more tradesmanlike, than these movings, compelled by the
coming of balls and concerts. To give fêtes, really of the first class,
without inconveniencing oneself, there must be devoted to their uses
peculiar and special suites of apartments; and then vast and splendid
rooms, devoted to a magnificent ball, ought to assume an appearance
wholly distinct from that of ordinary salons. There is the same
difference between these two sets of apartments as between a monumental
fresco-painting and a sketch on a painter's easel."

"He is right," said M. d'Harville. "What a pity, gentlemen, that
Saint-Remy has not twelve or fifteen hundred thousand livres a year!
What wonders he would create for our admiration!"

"Since we have the happiness to possess a representative government,"
said the Duke de Lucenay, "the country ought to vote a million or two a
year to Saint-Remy, and authorise him to represent in Paris the French
taste and elegance, which should decide the taste and elegance of all
Europe,--all the world."

"Adopted!" cried the guests in chorus.

"And we would raise these annual millions as compulsory taxes on those
abominable misers, who, being possessors of colossal fortunes, should be
marked down, accused, and convicted of living like gripe-farthings,"
added M. de Lucenay.

"And as such," added M. d'Harville, "condemned to defray those
splendours which they ought to display."

"Not including that these functions of high priest, or, rather, grand
master of elegance, which would devolve on Saint-Remy," continued M. de
Lucenay, "would have, by imitation, an enormous influence on the general
taste."

"He would be the type which all would seek to resemble."

"That is evident."

"And, in endeavouring to imitate him, taste would become purified."

"At the time of the Renaissance taste became universally excellent,
because it was modelled on that of the aristocracy, which was
exquisite."

"By the serious turn which the question has taken," said M. d'Harville,
gaily, "I see that we have only to address a petition to the Chambers
for the establishment of the office of grand master of French elegance."

"And as the Deputies have credit for possessing very elevated, very
artistic, and very magnificent ideas, of course it will be voted by
acclamation."

"Whilst we are waiting the decision which shall establish as a right the
supremacy which Saint-Remy exercises in fact," said M. d'Harville, "I
will ask him his opinion as to the gallery which I propose to erect; for
I have been struck with his ideas as to the right splendour of fêtes."

"My faint lights are at your service, D'Harville."

"And when shall we commence our magnificences, my dear fellow?"

"Next year, I suppose, for I intend to begin my works without delay."

"How full of projects you are!"

"_Ma foi!_ I have others also; I contemplate an entire alteration of
Val-Richer."

"Your estate in Burgundy?"

"Yes; there is much that may be done there, if, indeed, God grants me
life."

"Poor old fellow!"

"Have you not recently bought a farm near Val-Richer to complete your
ring-fence?"

"Yes, a very nice thing, to which I was advised by my notary."

"And who is this rare and precious notary who advises such admirable
purchases?"

"M. Jacques Ferrand."

At this name a slight shudder came over M. de Saint-Remy, and he frowned
imperceptibly.

"Is he really the honest man they call him?" he inquired, carelessly, of
M. d'Harville, who then remembered what Rodolph had related to Clémence
about the notary.

"Jacques Ferrand? What a question! Why, his honesty is a proverb," said
M. de Lucenay.

"As respected as respectable."

"And very pious; which does him no harm."

"Excessively stingy; which is a guarantee for his clients."

"In fact, he is one of the notaries of the 'old rock,' who ask you whom
you take them for when you ask them for a receipt for the money which
you place in their hands."

"That would have no effect on me; I would trust him with my whole
fortune."

"But where the deuce did Saint-Remy imbibe his doubts with respect to
this honest man, whose integrity is proverbial?"

"I am but the echo of certain vague reports; besides, I have no reason
for running down this phoenix of notaries. But to return to your
plans, D'Harville, what is it you wish to build at Val-Richer? I have
heard that the château is excessively beautiful."

"Make yourself easy, my dear Saint-Remy, for you shall be consulted, and
sooner than you expect, perhaps, for I take much pleasure in such works.
I think that there is nothing more interesting than to have those
affairs in hand, which expand as you examine them, and they advance,
giving you occupation for years to come. To-day one project, next year
another, after that something else springs up. Add to this a charming
woman whom one adores, and who shares your every taste and pleasure,
then, _ma foi!_ life passes sweetly enough."

"I think so, _pardieu_! Why, it then makes earth a perfect paradise."

"Now, gentlemen," said D'Harville, when the breakfast was finished, "if
you will smoke a cigar in my cabinet, you will find some excellent
Havannahs there."

They rose from the table, and returned to the cabinet of the marquis.
The door of his bedchamber, which communicated with it, was open. We
have said the only decoration of the room consisted of two small racks
of very beautiful arms.

M. de Lucenay, having lighted a cigar, followed the marquis into his
room.

"You see, I am still a great lover of good weapons," said D'Harville to
him.

"Yes, and I see you have here some splendid English and French guns. _Ma
foi!_ I hardly know which to admire most. Douglas," exclaimed M. de
Lucenay, "come and see if these fowling-pieces are not equal to your
crack Mantons."

Lord Douglas, Saint-Remy, and the two other guests went into the
marquis's room to examine the arms.

M. d'Harville, taking down a duelling-pistol, cocked it, and said,
laughingly:

"Here, gentlemen, is the universal panacea for all the ills,--spleen,
disgust, weariness."

And as he spoke, jestingly, he placed the muzzle to his lips.

"_Ma foi!_ I prefer another specific," said Saint-Remy; "that is only
good in the most desperate cases."

"Yes, but it is so speedy," said M. d'Harville. "Click! and it is done!"

"Pray be cautious, D'Harville; these jokes are always so rash and
dangerous; and accident happens in an instant," said M. de Lucenay.

"My dear fellow, do you think I would do so if it were loaded?"

"Of course not, but it is always imprudent."

"See, gentlemen, how it is done. You introduce the muzzle delicately
between the teeth, and then--"

"How foolish you are, D'Harville, to place it so!" said M. de Lucenay.

"You place your finger on the trigger--" continued M. d'Harville.

"What a child! What folly at your age!"

"A small touch on the lock," added the marquis, "and one goes--"

As he spoke the pistol went off. M. d'Harville had blown his brains out.

It is impossible to paint the horror,--the stupor, of M. d'Harville's
guests.

[Illustration: _M. d'Harville had blown his brains out._
Original Etching by Mercier.]

Next day the following appeared in one of the newspapers:

    "Yesterday an event, as unforeseen as deplorable, put all the
    Faubourg St. Germain in a state of excitement. One of those
    imprudent acts, which every year produce such sad accidents, has
    caused this terrible misfortune. The following are the facts
    which we have gathered, the authenticity of which may be relied
    upon.

    "The Marquis d'Harville, the possessor of an immense fortune,
    and scarcely twenty-six years of age, universally known for his
    kind-hearted benevolence, and married but a few years to a wife
    whom he idolised, had some friends to breakfast with him; on
    leaving the table, they went into M. d'Harville's sleeping
    apartment, where there were several firearms of considerable
    value. Whilst the guests were looking at some choice
    fowling-pieces, M. d'Harville in jest took up a pistol which he
    thought was not loaded, and placed the muzzle to his lips.
    Though warned by his friends, he pressed on the trigger,--the
    pistol went off, and the unfortunate young gentleman dropped
    down dead, with his skull horribly fractured. It is impossible
    to describe the extreme consternation of the friends of M.
    d'Harville, with whom but a few instants before he had been
    talking of various plans and projects, full of life, spirits,
    and animation. In fact, as if all the circumstances of this sad
    event must be still more cruel by the most painful contrasts,
    that very morning M. d'Harville, desirous of agreeably
    surprising his wife, had purchased a most expensive ornament,
    which he intended as a present to her. It was at this very
    moment, when, perhaps, life had never appeared more smiling and
    attractive, that he fell a victim to this most distressing
    accident.

    "All reflections on such a dreadful event are useless. We can
    only remain overwhelmed at the inscrutable decrees of
    Providence."

We quote this journal in order to show the general opinion which
attributed the death of Clémence's husband to fatal and lamentable
imprudence.

Is there any occasion to say that M. d'Harville alone carried with him
to the tomb the mysterious secret of his voluntary death,--yes,
voluntary and calculated upon, and meditated with as much calmness as
generosity, in order that Clémence might not conceive the slightest
suspicion as to the real cause of his suicide?

Thus the projects of which M. d'Harville had talked with his steward and
his friends,--those happy confidences to his old servant, the surprise
which he proposed for his wife, were all but so many precautions for the
public credulity.

How could it be supposed that a man so preoccupied as to the future, so
anxious to please his wife, could think of killing himself? His death
was, therefore, attributed to imprudence, and could not be attributed to
anything else.

As to his determination, an incurable despair had dictated that. By
showing herself as affectionate towards him, and as tender as she had
formerly been cold and disdainful, by again appearing to entertain a
high regard, Clémence had awakened in the heart of her husband deep
remorse.

Seeing her so sadly resigned to a long life without love, passed with a
man visited by an incurable and frightful malady, and utterly persuaded
that, after her solemn conversation, Clémence could never subdue the
repugnance with which he inspired her, M. d'Harville was seized with a
profound pity for his wife, and an entire disgust for himself and for
life.

In the exasperation of his anguish, he said to himself:

"I only love,--I never can love,--but one woman in the world, and she is
my own wife. Her conduct, full of noble-heartedness and high mind, would
but increase my mad passion, if it be possible to increase it. And she,
my wife, can never belong to me! She has a right to despise,--to hate
me! I have, by base deceit, chained this young creature to my hateful
lot! I repent it bitterly. What, then, should I do for her? Free her
from the hateful ties which my selfishness has riveted upon her. My
death alone can break those rivets; and I must, therefore, die by my own
hand!"

This was why M. d'Harville had accomplished this great,--this terrible
sacrifice.

The inexorable immutability of the law sometimes makes certain terrible
positions irremediable, and, as in this case (as divorce was
unattainable), only allows the injury to be effaced by an additional
crime.




CHAPTER IX.

ST. LAZARE.


The prison of St. Lazare, especially devoted to female thieves and
prostitutes, is daily visited by many ladies, whose charity, whose
names, and whose social position command universal respect. These
ladies, educated in the midst of the splendours of fortune,--these
ladies, properly belonging to the best society,--come every week to pass
long hours with the miserable prisoners of St. Lazare; watching in these
degraded souls for the least indication of an aspiration towards good,
the least regret for a past criminal life, and encouraging the good
tendencies, urging repentance, and, by the potent magic of the words,
Duty, Honour, Virtue, withdrawing from time to time one of these
abandoned, fallen, degraded, despised creatures, from the depths of
utter pollution.

Accustomed to delicacy and the most polished breeding of the highest
circles, these courageous females quit their homes, after having pressed
their lips on the virgin foreheads of their daughters, pure as the
angels of heaven, and go into dark prisons to brave the coarse
indifference or infamous language of these thieves and lost women.

Faithful to their tasks of high morality, they boldly plunge into the
tainted soil, place their hands on those gangrened hearts, and, if any
feeble pulsation of honour reveals to them a slight hope of recovery,
they contend for and snatch from irrevocable perdition the wretched soul
of which they have never despaired.

Having said so much by way of introduction to the new scenes to which we
are about to direct attention, we will introduce the reader to St.
Lazare, an immense edifice of imposing and repulsive aspect, situated in
the Faubourg St. Denis.

Ignorant of the shocking drama that was passing at her own house, Madame
d'Harville had gone to the prison, after having received certain
information from Madame de Lucenay as to the two unhappy females whom
the cupidity of Jacques Ferrand had plunged into misery. Madame de
Blinval, one of the patronesses of the charity of the young prisoners,
being on this day unable to accompany Clémence to St. Lazare, she had
gone thither alone. She was received with great attention by the
governor and the several female superintendents, who were distinguished
by their black garments and the blue riband with the silver medal which
they wore around their necks. One of these superintendents, a female of
mature age, with a serious but kind expression of countenance, remained
alone with Madame d'Harville, in a small room attached to the registry
office.

We may easily suppose that there is often unrecognised devotion,
understanding, commiseration, and sagacity amongst the respectable
females who devote themselves to the humble and obscure function of
superintendent of the prisoners. Nothing can be more excellent, more
practical, than the notions of order, work, and duty which they
endeavour to instil into the prisoners, in the hope that these
instructions may survive their term of imprisonment. In turns indulgent
and firm, patient and severe, but always just and impartial, these
females, incessantly in contact with the prisoners, end, after the
lengthened experience of years, by acquiring such a knowledge of the
physiognomy of these unfortunates that they can judge of them almost
invariably from the first glance, and can at once classify them
according to their degree of immorality.

Madame Armand, the inspectress who remained with Madame d'Harville,
possessed in a remarkable degree this almost supernatural prescience as
to the character of the prisoners; her words and decisions had very
great weight in the establishment.

Madame Armand said to Clémence:

"Since madame wishes me to point out to her such of our prisoners as
have by good conduct, or sincere repentance, deserved that an interest
should be taken in them, I believe I can mention to her a poor girl whom
I believe to be more unfortunate than culpable; for I am not deceived
when I say that it is not too late to save this young girl, an unhappy
creature of not more than sixteen or seventeen years of age."

"And for what is she imprisoned?"

"She is guilty of being found in the Champs Elysées in the evening. As
it is prohibited to such females, under very severe penalties, to
frequent, by day or night, certain public places, and as the Champs
Elysées are in the number of the forbidden promenades, she was
apprehended."

"And does she appear to you interesting?"

"I never saw features more regular, more ingenuous. Picture to yourself,
my lady, the face of a Virgin; and what adds still more to the
expression of modesty in her countenance is that, on coming here, she
was dressed like a peasant girl of the environs of Paris."

"She is, then, a country girl?"

"No, my lady; the inspectors knew her again. She had lived for some
weeks in a horrible abode in the Cité, from which she has been absent
for two or three months; but, as she had not demanded the erasure of her
name from the police registries, she comes under the power of that body,
which has sent her hither."

"But, perhaps, she had quitted Paris to try and reinstate herself?"

"I think so, madame; and it is therefore I have taken such an interest
in her. I have questioned her as to her past life, inquired if she came
from the country, and told her to hope, as I did myself, that she might
still return to a course of good life."

"And what reply did she make?"

"Lifting her full and melancholy blue eyes on me, filled with tears, she
said, with angelic sweetness, 'I thank you, madame, for your kindness;
but I cannot say one word as to the past; I was apprehended,--I was
doing wrong, and I do not therefore complain.' 'But where do you come
from? Where have you been since you quitted the Cité? If you went into
the country to seek an honest livelihood, say so, and prove it. We will
write to the prefect to obtain your liberty, your name will be scratched
off the police register, and you will be encouraged in your good
resolutions.' 'I beseech you, madame, do not ask me; I cannot answer
you,' she replied. 'But, on leaving this house, would you return again
to that place of infamy?' 'Oh, never!' she exclaimed. 'What, then, will
you do?' 'God only knows!' she replied, letting her head fall on her
bosom."

"Very singular! And she expresses herself--"

"In very excellent terms, madame; her deportment is timid and
respectful, but without servility; nay, more, in spite of the extreme
gentleness of her voice and look, there is in her accent and her
attitude a sort of proud sorrow which puzzles me. If she did not belong
to that wretched class of which she forms one, I should say that her
haughtiness announces a soul which has a consciousness of dignity."

"But this is all a romance!" exclaimed Clémence, deeply interested, and
finding, as Rodolph had told her, that nothing was more interesting than
to do good. "And how does she behave with the other prisoners? If she
is endowed with that dignity of soul that you imagine, she must suffer
excessively in the midst of her wretched associates."

"Madame, for me, who observe all from my position, and from habit, all
about this young girl is a subject of astonishment. Although she has
been here only three days, yet she already possesses a sort of influence
over the other prisoners."

"In so short a time?"

"They feel for her not only interest, but almost respect."

"What! these unhappy women--"

"Have sometimes the instinct of a remarkable delicacy in recognising and
detecting noble qualities in others; only, they frequently hate those
persons whose superiority they are compelled to admit."

"But do they hate this poor girl?"

"Far from it, my lady; none of them knew her before she came here. They
were at first struck with her appearance. Her features, although of
singular beauty, are, if I may so express myself, covered with a
touching and sickly paleness; and this melancholy and gentle countenance
at first inspired them with more interest than jealousy. Then she is
very silent, another source of surprise for these creatures, who, for
the most part, always endeavour to banish thought by making a noise,
talking, and moving about. In fact, although reserved and retiring, she
showed herself compassionate, which prevented her companions from taking
offence at her coldness of manner. This is not all: about a month since,
an intractable creature, nicknamed La Louve (the she-wolf), such is her
violent and brutal character, became a resident here. She is a woman of
twenty years of age, tall, masculine, with good-looking but strongly
marked features, and we are sometimes compelled to place her in the
black-hole to subdue her violence. The day before yesterday, only, she
came out of the cell, still irritated at the punishment she had
undergone; it was meal-time, the poor girl of whom I speak could not
eat, and said, sorrowfully, to her companions, 'Who will have my bread?'
'I will!' said La Louve. 'I will!' then said a creature almost deformed,
called Mont Saint-Jean, who is the laughing-stock and, sometimes in
spite of us, the butt of the other prisoners, although several months
advanced in pregnancy. The young girl gave her bread to this latter, to
the extreme anger of La Louve. 'It was I who asked you for the allowance
first!' she exclaimed, furiously. 'That is true; but this poor woman is
about to become a mother, and wants it more than you do,' replied the
young girl. La Louve, notwithstanding, snatched the bread from the hands
of Mont Saint-Jean, and began to wave her knife about, and to vociferate
loudly. As she is very evil-disposed and much feared, no one dared take
the part of the poor Goualeuse, although all the prisoners silently
sided with her."

"What do you call her name, madame?"

"La Goualeuse; it is the name, or rather the nickname, under which they
brought her here who is my protégée, and will, I hope, my lady, soon be
yours. Almost all of them have borrowed names."

"This is a very singular one."

"It signifies in their horrid jargon 'the singer,' for the young girl
has, they told me, a very delightful voice; and I believe it, for her
speaking tones are sweetness itself."

"But how did she escape from this wretch, La Louve?"

"Rendered still more furious by the composure of La Goualeuse, she
rushed towards her, uttering menaces, and with her uplifted knife in her
hand. All the prisoners cried out with fear; La Goualeuse alone, looking
at this fierce creature without alarm, smiled at her bitterly and said,
in her sweet voice, 'Oh, kill me! Kill me! I am willing to die. But do
not make me suffer too great pain!' These words, they told me, were
uttered with a simplicity so affecting, that almost all the prisoners
burst into tears."

"I can imagine so," said Madame d'Harville, deeply moved.

"The worst characters," continued the inspectress, "have, fortunately,
occasional good feelings. When she heard these words, bearing the stamp
of such painful resignation, La Louve, touched (as she afterwards
declared) to her inmost core, threw her knife on the ground, fell at her
feet and exclaimed, 'It was wrong--shameful to threaten you, Goualeuse,
for I am stronger than you! You are not afraid of my knife; you are
bold--brave! I like brave people; and now, from this day forth, if any
dare to molest you, let them beware, for I will defend you.'"

"What a singular being!"

"This incident strengthened La Goualeuse's influence still more and
more. A thing almost unexampled here, none of the prisoners accost her
familiarly. The majority are respectful to her, and even proffer to do
for her all the little services that prisoners can render to one
another. I spoke to some of the women of her dormitory, to learn the
reason of this deference which was evinced towards her. 'It is hardly
explicable to ourselves,' they replied; 'but it is easy to perceive she
is not one of us.' 'But who told you so?' 'No one told us; it is easy to
discover it.' 'By what?' 'By a thousand things. In the first place,
before she goes to bed, she goes down on her knees and says her prayers;
and if she pray, as La Louve says, why, she must have a right to do
so.'"

"What a strange observation!"

"These unhappy creatures have no religious feeling, and still they never
utter here an impious or irreligious word. You will see, madame, in all
our rooms small altars, where the statue of the Virgin is surrounded
with offerings and ornaments which they have made. Every Sunday they
burn a quantity of wax candles before them in _ex-voto_. Those who
attend the chapel behave remarkably well; but generally the very sight
of holy places frightens them. To return to La Goualeuse; her companions
said to me, 'We see that she is not one of us, by her gentle ways, her
sadness, and the manner in which she talks.' 'And then,' added La Louve
(who was present at this conversation), abruptly, 'it is quite certain
that she is not one of us, for this morning, in the dormitory, without
knowing why, we were all ashamed of dressing ourselves before her.'"

"What remarkable delicacy in the midst of so much degradation!"
exclaimed Madame d'Harville.

"Yes, madame, in the presence of men, and amongst themselves, modesty is
unknown to them, and yet they are painfully confused at being seen half
dressed by us or the charitable visitors who come, like your ladyship,
to the prison. Thus the profound instinct of modesty, which God has
implanted in us, reveals itself even in these fallen creatures, at the
sight of those persons whom they can respect."

"It is at least consolatory to find some good and natural feelings,
which are stronger even than depravity."

"Assuredly it is; and these women are capable of devoted attachments
which, were they worthily placed, would be most honourable. There is
also another sacred feeling with them, who respect nothing, fear
nothing, and that is maternity. They honour it, rejoice at it; and they
are admirable mothers, considering nothing a sacrifice to keep their
children near them. They will undergo any trouble, difficulty, or danger
that they may bring them up; for, as they say, these little beings are
the only ones who do not despise them."

"Have they, then, so deep a sense of their abject condition?"

"They are not half so much despised by others as they despise
themselves. With those who sincerely repent, the original blot of sin is
ineffaceable in their own eyes, even if they should find themselves in a
better position; others go mad, so irremediably is this idea imprinted
in their minds; and I should not be surprised, madame, if the heartfelt
grief of La Goualeuse is attributable to something of this nature."

"If so, how she must suffer!--a remorse which nothing can soothe!"

"Fortunately, madame, this remorse is more frequent than is commonly
believed. The avenging conscience is never completely lulled to sleep;
or, rather, strange as it may appear, sometimes it would seem that the
soul is awake whilst the body is in a stupor; and this remark I again
made last night in reference to my protégée."

"What! La Goualeuse?"

"Yes, madame."

"In what way?"

"Frequently, when the prisoners are asleep, I walk through the
dormitories. You would scarcely believe, my lady, how the countenances
of these women differ in expression whilst they are slumbering. A good
number of them, whom I have seen during the day, saucy, careless, bold,
insolent, have appeared entirely changed when sleep has removed from
their features all exaggeration of bravado; for, alas, vice has its
pride! Oh, madame, what sad revelations on those dejected, mournful, and
gloomy faces! What painful sighs, involuntarily elicited by some dream.
I was speaking to your ladyship just now of the girl they call La
Louve,--an untamed, untamable creature. It is but a fortnight since that
she abused me in the vilest terms before all the prisoners. I shrugged
up my shoulders, and my indifference whetted her rage. Then, in order to
offend me more sorely, she began to say all sorts of disgraceful things
of my mother, whom she had often seen come here to visit me."

"What a shameful creature!"

"I confess that, although this attack was not worth minding, yet it made
me feel uncomfortable. La Louve perceived this, and rejoiced in it. The
same night, about midnight, I went to inspect the dormitories; I went to
La Louve's bedside (she was not to be put in the dark cell until next
day) and I was struck with her calmness,--I might say the sweetness of
her countenance,--compared with the harsh and daring expression which is
habitual to it. Her features seemed suppliant, filled with regret and
contrition; her lips were half open, her breast seemed oppressed,
and--what appeared to me incredible, for I thought it impossible--two
tears, two large tears, were in the eyes of this woman, whose
disposition was of iron! I looked at her in silence for several minutes,
when I heard her say, 'Pardon! Pardon! Her mother!' I listened more
attentively, but all I could catch, in the midst of a murmur scarcely
intelligible, was my name, 'Madame Armand,' uttered with a sigh."

"She repented, during her sleep, of having uttered this bad language
about your mother."

"So I believe; and that made me less severe. No doubt she desired,
through a miserable vanity, to increase her natural insolence in her
companions' eyes, whilst, perhaps, a good instinct made her repent in
her sleep."

"And did she evince any repentance for her bad behaviour next day?"

"Not the slightest, but conducted herself as usual, and was coarse,
rude, and obstinate; but I assure your ladyship that nothing disposes us
more to pity than the observations I have mentioned to you. I am
persuaded (I may deceive myself, perhaps) that, during their sleep,
these unfortunates become better, or rather return to themselves, with
all their faults, it is true, but also with certain good instincts, no
longer masked by the detestable assumption of vice. From all I have
observed, I am led to believe that these creatures are generally less
wicked than they affect to be; and, acting upon this conviction, I have
often attained results it would have been impossible to realise, if I
had entirely despaired of them."

Madame d'Harville could not conceal her surprise at so much good sense,
and so much just reasoning, joined to sentiments of humanity so noble
and so practical, in an obscure inspectress of degraded women.

"But my dear madame," observed Clémence, "you must have a great deal of
courage, and much strength of mind, not to be repulsed by the
ungratefulness of the task, which must so very seldom reward you by
satisfactory results!"

"The consciousness of fulfilling a duty sustains and encourages, and
sometimes we are recompensed by happy discoveries; now and then we find
some rays of light in hearts which have hitherto been supposed to be in
utter darkness."

"Yet, madame, persons like you are very rarely met with?"

"No, I assure your ladyship, others do as I do, with more success and
intelligence than I have. One of the inspectresses of the other division
of St. Lazare, which is occupied by females charged with different
crimes, would interest you much more. She told me this morning of the
arrival of a young girl accused of infanticide. I never heard anything
more distressing. The father of the unhappy girl, a hard-working, honest
lapidary, has gone mad with grief on hearing his daughter's shame. It
seems that nothing could be more frightful than the destitution of all
this family, who lived in a wretched garret in the Rue du Temple."

"The Rue du Temple!" exclaimed Madame d'Harville, much astonished; "what
is the workman's name?"

"His daughter's name is Louise Morel."

"'Tis as I thought, then!"

"She was in the service of a respectable lawyer named M. Jacques
Ferrand."

"This poor family has been recommended to me," said Clémence, blushing;
"but I was far from expecting to see it bowed down by this fresh and
terrible blow. And Louise Morel--"

"Declares her innocence, and affirms her child was born dead; and it
seems as if hers were accents of truth. Since your ladyship takes an
interest in this family, if you would be so good as to see the poor
girl, perhaps this mark of your kindness might soothe her despair, which
they tell me is really alarming."

"Certainly I will see her; then I shall have two protégées instead of
one, Louise Morel and La Goualeuse, for all you tell me relative to this
poor girl interests me excessively. But what must be done to obtain her
liberty? I will then find a situation for her. I will take care of her
in future."

"With your connections, madame, it will be very easy for you to obtain
her liberty the day after to-morrow, for it is at the discretion of the
Prefect of Police, and the application of a person of consequence would
be decisive with him. But I have wandered from the observation which I
made on the slumber of La Goualeuse; and, with reference to this, I must
confess that I should not be astonished if, to the deeply painful
feeling of her first error, there is added some other grief no less
severe."

"What mean you, madame?"

"Perhaps I am deceived; but I should not be astonished if this young
girl, rescued by some circumstance from the degradation in which she was
first plunged, has now some honest love, which is at the same time her
happiness and her torment."

"What are your reasons for believing this?"

"The determined silence which she keeps as to where she has passed the
three months which followed her departure from the Cité makes me think
that she fears being discovered by the persons with whom she in all
probability found a shelter."

"Why should she fear this?"

"Because then she would have to own to a previous life, of which they
are no doubt ignorant."

"True; her peasant's dress."

"And then a subsequent circumstance has confirmed my suspicions.
Yesterday evening, when I was walking my round of inspection in the
dormitory, I went up to La Goualeuse's bed. She was in a deep sleep,
and, unlike her companions, her features were calm and tranquil. Her
long, light hair, half disengaged from their bands, fell in profusion
down her neck and shoulders. Her two small hands were clasped, and
crossed over her bosom, as if she had gone to sleep whilst praying. I
looked for some moments with interest at her lovely face, when, in a low
voice, and with an accent at once respectful, sad, and impassioned, she
uttered a name."

"And that name?"

After a moment's silence, Madame Armand replied, gravely:

"Although I consider that anything learnt during sleep is sacred, yet
you interest yourself so generously in this unfortunate girl, madame,
that I will confide this name to your secrecy. It was Rodolph."

"Rodolph!" exclaimed Madame d'Harville, thinking of the prince. Then,
reflecting that, after all, his highness the Grand Duke of Gerolstein
could have no connection with the Rodolph of the poor Goualeuse, she
said to the inspectress, who seemed astonished at her exclamation:

"The name has surprised me, madame, for, by a singular chance, it is
that of a relation of mine; but what you tell me of La Goualeuse
interests me more and more. Can I see her to-day? now--directly?"

"Yes, madame, I will go, as you wish it, and ask her; I can also learn
more of Louise Morel, who is in the other side of the prison."

"I shall, indeed, be greatly obliged to you, madame," replied Madame
d'Harville, who the next moment was alone.

"How strange!" she said. "I cannot account for the singular impression
which this name of Rodolph makes upon me! I am really quite insane! What
connection can there be between him and such a creature?" Then, after a
moment's silence, the marchioness added, "He was right; how all this
does interest me! The mind, the heart, expand when they are occupied so
nobly! 'Tis as he said; we seem to participate somewhat in the power of
Providence when we aid those who deserve it; and, then, these excursions
into a world of which we had no idea are so attractive,--so amusing, as
he said so pleasantly! What romance could give me such deep feelings,
excite my curiosity to such a pitch? This poor Goualeuse, for instance,
has inspired me with deep pity, after all I have heard of her; and I
will blindly follow up this commiseration, for the inspectress has too
much experience to be deceived with respect to our protégée. And the
other unhappy girl,--the artisan's daughter, whom the prince has so
generously succoured in my name! Poor people! their bitter suffering has
served as a pretext to save me. I have escaped shame, perhaps death, by
a hypocritical falsehood. This deceit weighs on my mind, but I will
expiate my fault by my charity, though that may be too easy a mode. It
is so sweet to follow Rodolph's noble advice! It is to love as well as
to obey him. Oh, I feel it with rapture! His breath, alone, animates and
fertilises the new existence which he has given me in directing me to
console those who suffer. I experience an unalloyed delight in acting
but as he directs, in having no ideas but his; for I love him,--ah, yes,
I love him! And yet he shall always be in ignorance of this, the
lasting passion of my life."

       *       *       *       *       *

Whilst Madame d'Harville is waiting for La Goualeuse, we will conduct
the reader into the presence of the prisoners.




CHAPTER X.

MONT SAINT-JEAN.


It was just two o'clock by the dial of the prison of St. Lazare. The
cold, which had lasted for several days, had been succeeded by soft,
mild, and almost spring weather; the rays of the sun were reflected in
the water of the large square basin, with its stone corners, formed in
the centre of a courtyard planted with trees, and surrounded by dark,
high walls pierced with a great many iron-barred windows. Wooden benches
were fastened here and there in this large paved enclosure, which served
for the walking-place of the prisoners. The ringing of a bell announcing
the hour of recreation, the prisoners came in throngs by a thick
wicket-door which was opened to them. These women, all clad alike, wore
black skull-caps and long loose gowns of blue woollen cloth, fastened
around the waist by a band and iron buckle. There were there two hundred
prostitutes, sentenced for breach of the particular laws which control
them and place them out of the pale of the common law. At first sight
their appearance had nothing striking, but, after regarding them with
further attention, there might be detected in each face the almost
ineffaceable stigmas of vice, and particularly that brutishness which
ignorance and misery invariably engender. Whilst contemplating these
masses of lost creatures, we cannot help recollecting with sorrow that
most of them have been pure and honest, at least at some former period.
We say "most of them," because there are some who have been corrupted,
vitiated, depraved, not only from their youth, but from tenderest
infancy,--even from their very birth, if we may say so; and we shall
prove it as we proceed.

We ask ourselves, then, with painful curiosity, what chain of fatal
causes could thus debase these unhappy creatures, who have known shame
and chastity? There are so many declivities, alas, which verge to that
fall! It is rarely the passion of the depraved for depravity; but
dissipation, bad example, perverse education, and, above all, want,
which lead so many unfortunates to infamy; and it is the poor classes
alone who pay to civilisation this impost on soul and body.

       *       *       *       *       *

When the prisoners came into the yard, running and crying out, it was
easy to discern that it was not alone the pleasure of leaving their work
that made them so noisy. After having hurried forth by the only gate
which led to this yard, the crowd spread out and made a ring around a
misshapen being, whom they assailed with shouts. She was a small woman,
from thirty-six to forty years of age; short, round-shouldered,
deformed, and with her neck buried between shoulders of unequal height.
They had snatched off her black cap, and her hair, which was flaxen, or
rather a pale yellow, coarse, matted, and mingled with gray, fell over
her low and stupid features. She was clad in a blue loose gown, like the
other prisoners, and had under her right arm a small bundle, wrapped up
in a miserable, ragged, checked pocket-handkerchief. With her left elbow
she endeavoured to ward off the blows aimed at her. Nothing could be
more lamentably ludicrous than the visage of this unhappy woman. She was
hideous and distorted in figure, with projecting features, wrinkled,
tanned, and dirty, which were pierced with two holes for nostrils, and
two small, red, bloodshot eyes. By turns wrathful and imploring, she
scolded and entreated; but they laughed even more at her complaints than
her threats. This woman was the plaything of the prisoners. One thing
ought, however, to have protected her from such ill-usage,--she was
evidently about to become a mother; but her ugliness, her imbecility,
and the custom they had of considering her as a victim intended for
common sport, rendered her persecutors implacable, in spite of their
usual respect for maternity.

Amongst the fiercest enemies of Mont Saint-Jean (that was the unhappy
wretch's name), La Louve was conspicuous. La Louve was a strapping girl
of twenty, active, and powerfully grown, with regular features. Her
coarse black hair was varied by reddish shades, whilst her blood
suffused her skin with its hue; a brown down shaded her thin lips; her
chestnut eyebrows, thick and projecting, were united over her large and
fierce eyes. There was something violent, savage, and brutal in the
expression of this woman's physiognomy,--a sort of habitual sneer, which
curled her upper lip during a fit of rage, and, exposing her white and
wide-apart teeth, accounted for her name of La Louve (the she-wolf). Yet
in that countenance there was more of boldness and insolence than
cruelty; and, in a word, it was seen that, rather become vicious than
born so, this woman was still susceptible of certain good impulses, as
the inspectress had told Madame d'Harville.

"Alas! alas! What have I done?" exclaimed Mont Saint-Jean, struggling in
the midst of her companions. "Why are you so cruel to me?"

"Because it is so amusing."

"Because you are only fit to be teased."

"It is your business."

"Look at yourself, and you will see that you have no right to complain."

"But you know well enough that I don't complain as long as I can help
it; I bear it as long as I can."

"Well, we'll let you alone, if you will tell us why you call yourself
Mont Saint-Jean."

"Yes, yes; come, tell us all that directly."

"Why, I've told you a hundred times. It was an old soldier that I loved
a long while ago, and who was called so because he was wounded at the
battle of Mont Saint-Jean; so I took his name. That's it; now are you
satisfied? You will make me repeat the same thing over, and over, and
over!"

"If your soldier was like you, he was a beauty!"

"I suppose he was in the Invalids?"

"The remains of a man--"

"How many glass eyes had he?"

"And wasn't his nose of block tin?"

"He must have been short of two arms and two legs, besides being deaf
and blind, if he took up with you."

"I am ugly,--a monster, I know that as well as you can tell me. Say what
you like,--make game of me, if you choose, it's all one to me; only
don't beat me, that's all, I beg!"

"What have you got in that old handkerchief?" asked La Louve.

"Yes, yes! What is it?"

"Show it up directly!"

"Let's see! Let's see!"

"Oh, no, I beg!" exclaimed the miserable creature, squeezing up the
little bundle in her hands with all her might.

"What! Must we take it from you?"

"Yes, snatch it from her, La Louve!"

"Oh, you won't be so wicked? Let it go! Let it go, I say!"

"What is it?"

"Why, it's the beginning of my baby linen; I make it with the old bits
of linen which no one wants, and I pick up. It's nothing to you, is it?"

"Oh, the baby linen of Mont Saint-Jean's little one! That must be a rum
set out!"

"Let's look at it."

"The baby clothes! The baby clothes!"

"She has taken measure of the keeper's little dog, no doubt."

"Here's your baby clothes," cried La Louve, snatching the bundle from
Mont Saint-Jean's grasp.

The handkerchief, already torn, was now rent to tatters, and a quantity
of fragments of stuff of all colours, and old pieces of linen half cut
out, flew around the yard, and were trampled under feet by the
prisoners, who holloaed and laughed louder than before.

"Here's your rags!"

"Why, it is a ragpicker's bag."

"Patterns from the ragman's."

"What a shop!"

"And to sew all that rubbish!"

"Why, there's more thread than stuff."

"What nice embroidery!"

"Here, pick up your rags and tatters, Mont Saint-Jean."

"Oh, how wicked! Oh, how cruel!" exclaimed the poor ill-used creature,
running in every direction after the pieces, which she endeavoured to
pick up in spite of pushes and blows. "I never did anybody any harm,"
she added, weeping. "I have offered, if they would let me alone, to do
anything I could for anybody, to give them half my allowance, although I
am always so hungry; but, no! no! it's always so. What can I do to be
left in peace? They haven't even pity of a poor woman in the family way.
They are more cruel than the beasts. Oh, the trouble I had to collect
these little bits of linen! How else can I make the clothes for my baby,
for I have no money to buy them with? What harm was there in picking up
what nobody else wanted when it was thrown away?" Then Mont Saint-Jean
exclaimed suddenly, with a ray of hope, "Oh, there you are, Goualeuse!
Now, then, I'm safe; do speak to them for me; they will listen to you, I
am sure, for they love you as much as they hate me."

La Goualeuse was the last of the prisoners who entered the enclosure.

Fleur-de-Marie wore the blue woollen gown and black skull-cap of the
prisoners; but even in this coarse costume she was still charming. Yet,
since her carrying off from the farm of Bouqueval (the consequences of
which circumstance we will explain hereafter), her features seemed
greatly altered; her pale cheeks, formerly tinged with a slight colour,
were as wan as the whiteness of alabaster; the expression, too, of her
countenance had changed, and was now imprinted with a kind of dignified
grief. Fleur-de-Marie felt that to bear courageously the painful
sacrifices of expiation is almost to attain restored position.

"Ask a favour for me, Goualeuse," said poor Mont Saint-Jean,
beseechingly, to the young girl; "see how they are flinging about the
yard all I had collected, with so much trouble, to begin my baby linen
for my child. What good can it do them?"

Fleur-de-Marie did not say a word, but began very actively to pick up,
one by one, from under the women's feet, all the rags she could collect.
One prisoner ill-temperedly kept her foot on a sort of little bed-gown
of coarse woollen cloth. Fleur-de-Marie, still stooping, looked up at
the woman, and said to her in a sweet tone:

"I beg of you let me pick it up. I ask it in the name of this poor woman
who is weeping."

The prisoner removed her foot. The bed-gown was rescued, as well as most
of the other scraps, which La Goualeuse acquired piece by piece. There
remained to obtain a small child's cap, which two prisoners were
struggling for, and laughing at. Fleur-de-Marie said to them:

"Be all good, pray do. Let me have the little cap."

"Oh, to be sure! It's for a harlequin in swaddling-clothes this cap is!
It is made of a bit of gray stuff, with points of green and black
fustian, and lined with a bit of an old mattress cover."

The description was exact, and was hailed with loud and long-continued
shoutings.

"Laugh away, but let me have it," said Mont Saint-Jean; "and pray do not
drag it in the mud as you have some of the other things. I'm sorry
you've made your hands so dirty for me, Goualeuse," she added, in a
grateful tone.

"Let me have the harlequin's cap," said La Louve, who obtained
possession of it, and waved it in the air as a trophy.

"Give it to me, I entreat you," said Goualeuse.

"No! You want to give it back to Mont Saint-Jean."

"Certainly I do."

"Oh, it is not worth while, it is such a rag."

"Mont Saint-Jean has nothing but rags to dress her child in, and you
ought to have pity upon her, La Louve," said Fleur-de-Marie, in a
mournful voice, and stretching out her hand towards the cap.

"You sha'n't have it!" answered La Louve, in a brutal tone; "must
everybody always give way to you because you are the weakest? You come,
I see, to abuse the kindness that is shown to you."

"But," said La Goualeuse, with a smile full of sweetness, "where would
be the merit of giving up to me, if I were the stronger of the two?"

"No, no; you want to wheedle me over with your smooth, canting words;
but it won't do,--you sha'n't have it, I tell you."

"Come, come, now, La Louve, do not be ill-natured."

"Let me alone! You tire me to death!"

"Oh, pray do!"

"I will not!"

"Yes, do,--let me beg of you!"

"Now, don't put me in a passion," exclaimed La Louve, thoroughly
irritated. "I have said no, and I mean no."

"Take pity on the poor thing, see how she is crying!"

"What is that to me? So much the worse for her; she is our pain-bearer"
(_souffre douleur_).

"So she is," murmured out a number of the prisoners, instigated by the
example of La Louve. "No, no, she ought not to have her rags back! So
much the worse for Mont Saint-Jean."

"You are right," said Fleur-de-Marie, with bitterness; "it is so much
the worse for her; she is your pain-bearer, she ought to submit herself
to your pleasure,--her tears and sighs amuse and divert you!--and you
must have some way of passing your time. Were you to kill her on the
spot, she would have no right to say anything. You speak truly, La
Louve, this is just and fair, is it not? Here is a poor, weak,
defenceless woman; alone in the midst of so many, she is quite unable to
defend herself, yet you all combine against her! Certainly your
behaviour towards her is most just and generous!"

"And I suppose you mean to say we are all a parcel of cowards?" retorted
La Louve, carried away by the violence of her disposition and extreme
impatience at anything like contradiction. "Answer me, do you call us
cowards, eh? Speak out, and let us know your meaning," continued she,
growing more and more incensed.

A murmur of displeasure against La Goualeuse, not unmixed with threats,
arose from the assembled crowd. The offended prisoners thronged around
her, vociferating their disapprobation, forgetting, or remembering but
as a fresh cause of offence, the ascendency she had until the present
moment exercised over them.

"She calls us cowards, you see!"

"What business has she to find fault with us?"

"Is she better than we are, I should like to know?"

"Ah, we have all been too kind to her!"

"And now she wants to give herself fine lady airs, and to domineer over
us! If we choose to torment Mont Saint-Jean, what need has she to
interfere?"

"Since it has come to this, I tell you what, Mont Saint-Jean, you shall
fare the worse for it for the future."

"Take this to begin with!" said one of the most violent of the party,
giving her a blow.

"And if you meddle again with what does not concern you, La Goualeuse,
we will serve you the same."

"Yes, that we will."

"But that is not all!" said La Louve. "La Goualeuse must ask our pardon
for having called us cowards. She must and she shall! If we don't put a
stop to her goings on, she will soon leave us without the power of
saying our soul is our own, and we are great fools not to have seen this
sooner."

"Make her ask our pardon."

"On her knee."

"On both knees."

"Or we will serve her precisely the same as we did her protégée, Mont
Saint-Jean!"

"Down on her knees! Down with her!"

"Lo! we are cowards, are we?"

"Dare to say it again!"

Fleur-de-Marie allowed this tumult to pass away, ere she replied to the
many furious voices that were raging around her. Then, casting a mild
and melancholy glance at the exasperated crowd, she said to La Louve,
who persisted in vociferating, "Will you dare to call us cowards again?"

"You? Oh, no, not you! I call this poor woman, whom you have so roughly
treated, whom you have dragged through the mud, and whose clothes you
have nearly torn off, a coward. Do you not see how she trembles, and
dares not even look at you? No, no! I say again, 'tis she who is a
coward, for being thus afraid of you."

Fleur-de-Marie had touched the right chord; in vain might she have
appealed to their sense of justice and duty, in order to allay their
bitter irritation against poor Mont Saint-Jean; the stupid or
brutalised minds of the prisoners would alike have been inaccessible to
her pleadings; but, by addressing herself to that sentiment of
generosity, which is never wholly extinct, even in the most depraved
characters, she kindled a spark of pity, that required but skilful
management to fan into a flame of commiseration, instead of hatred and
violence. La Louve, amid their continued murmurings against La Goualeuse
and her protégée, felt, and confessed, that their conduct had been both
unwomanly and cowardly.

Fleur-de-Marie would not carry her first triumph too far. She contented
herself with merely saying:

"Surely, if this poor creature, whom you call yours, to tease, to
torment, to ill-use,--in fact, your _souffre douleur_,--be not worthy of
your pity, her infant has done nothing to offend you. Did you forget,
when striking the mother, that the unborn babe might suffer from your
blows? And when she besought your mercy, 'twas not for herself, but her
child. When she craves of you a morsel of bread, if, indeed, you have it
to spare, 'tis not to satisfy her own hunger she begs it, but that her
infant may live; and when, with streaming eyes, she implored of you to
spare the few rags she had with so much difficulty collected together,
it arose from a mother's love for that unseen treasure her heart so
loves and prizes. This poor little patchwork cap, and the pieces of old
mattresses she has so awkwardly sewed together, no doubt appear to you
fit objects of mirth; but, for my own part, I feel far more inclined to
cry than to laugh at seeing the poor creature's instinctive attempts to
provide for her babe. So, if you laugh at Mont Saint-Jean, let me come
in for my share of your ridicule."

Not the faintest attempt at a smile appeared on any countenance, and La
Louve continued, with fixed gaze, to contemplate the little cap she
still held in her hand.

"I know very well," said Fleur-de-Marie, drying her eyes with the back
of her white and delicate hand,--"I know very well that you are not
really ill-natured or cruel, and that you merely torment Mont Saint-Jean
from thoughtlessness. But consider that she and her infant are one. If
she held it in her arms, not only would you carefully avoid doing it the
least injury, but I am quite sure, if it were cold, you would even take
from your own garments to cover it. Would not you, La Louve? Oh, I know
you would, every one of you!"

"To be sure we would,--every one pities a tender baby."

"That is quite natural."

"And if it cried with hunger, you would take the bread from your own
mouth to feed it with. Would not you, La Louve?"

"That I would, and willingly, too! I am not more hard-hearted than other
people!"

"Nor more are we!"

"A poor, helpless, little creature!"

"Who could have the heart to think of harming it?"

"They must be downright monsters!"

"Perfect savages!"

"Worse than wild beasts!"

"I told you so," resumed Fleur-de-Marie. "I said you were not
intentionally unkind; and you have proved that you are good and pitying
towards Mont Saint-Jean. The fault consisted in your not reflecting
that, although her child is yet unborn, it is still liable to harm from
any mischief that befalls its mother. That is all the wrong you have
done."

"All the wrong we have done!" exclaimed La Louve, much excited. "But I
say it is not all. You were right, La Goualeuse. We acted like a set of
cowards; and you alone deserve to be called courageous, because you did
not fear to tell us so, or shrink from us after you had told us. It is
nonsense to seek to deny the fact that you are not a creature like
us,--it is no use trying to persuade ourselves you are like such beings
as we are, so we may as well give it up. I don't like to own it, but it
is so; and I may just as well confess it. Just now, when we were all in
the wrong, you had courage enough, not only to refuse to join us, but to
tell us of our fault."

"That is true enough; and the fair-faced girl must have had a pretty
stock of courage to tell us the truth so plainly to our faces."

"But, bless you, these blue-eyed people, who look so soft and gentle, if
once they are worked up--"

"They become courageous as lions."

"Poor Mont Saint-Jean! She has good reason to be thankful to her!"

"What she says is true enough. We could not injure the mother without
harming the child also."

"I never thought of that."

"Nor I either."

"But you see La Goualeuse did,--she never forgets anything."

"The idea of hurting an infant! horrible! Is it not?"

"I'm sure there is not one of us would do it for anything that could be
offered us."

Nothing is more variable than popular passion, or more abrupt than its
rapid transition from bad to good, and even the reverse. The simple yet
touching arguments of Fleur-de-Marie had effected a powerful reaction in
favour of Mont Saint-Jean, who shed tears of deep joy. Every heart
seemed moved; for, as we have already said, the womanly feelings of the
prisoners had been awakened, and they now felt a solicitude for the
unhappy creature in proportion as they had formerly held her in dislike
and contempt. All at once, La Louve, violent and impetuous in all her
actions, twisted the little cap she held in her hand into a sort of
purse, and feeling in her pocket brought out twenty sous, which she
threw into the purse; then presenting it to her companions, exclaimed:

"Here is my twenty sous towards buying baby clothes for Mont
Saint-Jean's child. We will cut them out and make them ourselves, in
order that the work may cost nothing."

"Oh, yes, let us."

"To be sure,--let us all join!"

"I will for one."

"What a capital idea!"

"Poor creature!"

"Though she is so frightfully ugly, yet she has a mother's feelings the
same as another."

"La Goualeuse was right. It is really enough to make one cry one's eyes
out, to see what a wretched collection of rags the poor creature has
scraped together for her baby."

"Well, I'll give thirty sous."

"And I ten."

"I'll give twenty sous."

"I've only got four sous, but I'll give them."

"I have no money at all; but I'll sell my allowance for to-morrow, and
put whatever any one will give for it into the collection. Who'll buy my
to-morrow's rations?"

"I will," said La Louve. "So, here I put in ten sous for you; but you
shall keep your rations. And now, Mont Saint-Jean shall have baby
clothes fit for a princess."

To express the joy and gratitude of Mont Saint-Jean would be wholly
impossible. The most intense delight and happiness illumined her
countenance, and rendered even her usual hideous features interesting.
Fleur-de-Marie was almost as happy, though compelled to say, when La
Louve handed to her the collecting-cap:

"I am very sorry I have not a single sou of money, but I will work as
long as you please at making the clothes."

"Oh, my dear heavenly angel!" cried Mont Saint-Jean, throwing herself on
her knees before La Goualeuse, and striving to kiss her hand. "What have
I ever done to merit such goodness on your part, or the charity of these
kind ladies? Gracious Father! Do I hear aright? Baby things! and all
nice and comfortable for my child! A real, proper set of baby clothes!
Everything I can require! Who would ever have thought of such a thing? I
am sure I never should. I shall lose my senses with joy! Only to think
that a poor, miserable wretch like myself, the make-game of everybody,
should all at once, just because you spoke a few soft, sweet words out
of that heavenly mouth, have such wonderful blessings! See how your
words have changed those who meant to harm me, but who now pity me and
are my friends; and I feel as though I could never thank them enough, or
express my gratitude! Oh, how very, very kind of them! How wrong of me
to be offended and angry with what they said! How stupid and ungrateful
I must have been not to perceive that they were only playing with
me,--that they had no intention of harming me. Oh, no! It was all meant
for my good. Here is a proof of it. Oh, for the future, if they like to
knock me about ever so, I will not so much as cry out! Oh, I was too
impatient when I complained before; but I will make up for it next
time!"

"Eighty-eight francs seven sous!" said La Louve, finishing her reckoning
of the collection gathered by handing about the little bonnet. "Who will
be treasurer till we lay out the money? We must not entrust it to Mont
Saint-Jean, she is too simple."

"Let La Goualeuse take charge of it!" cried a unanimous burst of voices.

"No," said Fleur-de-Marie; "the best way will be to beg of the
inspectress, Madame Armand, to take charge of the sum collected, and to
buy the necessary articles for Mont Saint-Jean's confinement; and
then,--who knows?--perhaps Madame Armand may take notice of the good
action you have performed, and report it, so as to be the means of
shortening the imprisonment of all whose names are mentioned as being
concerned in it. Tell me, La Louve," added Fleur-de-Marie, taking her
companion by the arm, "are you not better satisfied with yourself than
you were just now, when you were throwing about all Mont Saint-Jean's
poor baby's things?"

La Louve did not immediately reply. To the generous excitement which a
few moments before animated her features, succeeded a sort of half
savage air of defiance. Unable to comprehend the cause of this sudden
change, Fleur-de-Marie looked at her with surprise.

"Come here, La Goualeuse," said La Louve at last, with a gloomy tone; "I
want to speak to you."

Then abruptly quitting the other prisoners, she led Fleur-de-Marie to a
reservoir of water, surrounded by a stone coping, which had been
hollowed out in the midst of an adjoining meadow. Near the water was a
bench, also of stone, on which La Louve and La Goualeuse placed
themselves, and were thus, in a manner, beyond the observation or
hearing of their companions.




CHAPTER XI.

LA LOUVE AND LA GOUALEUSE.


We firmly believe in the influence of certain master minds so far
sympathising with the masses, so powerful over them as to impose on them
the bias of good or evil. Some, bold, enthusiastic, indomitable,
addressing themselves to the worst passions, will rouse them, as the
storm raises the foam of the sea; but, like all tempests, these are as
ephemeral as they are furious; to these terrible effervescences will
succeed the sullen reversion of sadness and restlessness, which will
obtain supremacy over the most miserable conditions. The reaction of
violence is always severe; the waking after an excess is always painful.

La Louve, if you will, personifies this fatal influence.

Other organisations, more rare, because their generous instincts must be
fertilised by intelligence, and with them the mind is on an equality
with the heart,--others, we say, will inspire good, as well as some
inspire evil. Their wholesome influence will gently penetrate into the
soul, as the warm rays of the sun penetrate the body with invigorating
heat, as the arid and burning earth imbibes the fresh and grateful dew
of night.

Fleur-de-Marie, if you will, personifies this benevolent influence.

The reaction to good is not so sudden as the reaction to evil; its
effects are more protracted. It is something delicious, inexplicable,
which gradually extends itself, calms and soothes the most hardened
heart, and gives it the feeling of inexpressible serenity. Unfortunately
the charm ceases.

After having seen celestial brightness, ill-disposed persons fall back
into the darkness of their habitual life; the recollections of sweet
emotions which have for a moment surprised them are gradually effaced.
Still they sometimes seek vaguely to recall them, even as we try to
murmur out the songs with which our happy infancy was cradled. Thanks to
the good action with which she had inspired them, the companions of La
Goualeuse had tasted of the passing sweetness of these feelings, in
which even La Louve had participated; but this latter, for reasons we
shall describe hereafter, remained a shorter time than the other
prisoners under this benevolent feeling. If we are surprised to hear and
see Fleur-de-Marie, hitherto so passively, so painfully resigned, act
and speak with courage and authority, it was because the noble precepts
she had imbibed during her residence at the farm at Bouqueval had
rapidly developed the rare qualities of her admirable disposition.
Fleur-de-Marie understood that it is not sufficient to bewail the
irreparable past, and that it is only in doing or inspiring good that a
reinstatement can be hoped for.

       *       *       *       *       *

We have said that La Louve was sitting on a wooden bench, beside La
Goualeuse. The close proximity of these two young girls offered a
singular contrast.

The pale rays of a winter sun were shed over them; the pure sky was
speckled in places with small, white, and fleecy clouds; some birds,
enlivened by the warmth of the temperature, were warbling in the black
branches of the large chestnut-trees in the yard; two or three sparrows,
more bold than their fellows, came and drank in a small rivulet formed
by the overflow of the basin; the green moss covered the stones of the
fountain, and between their joints, here and there, were tufts of grass
and some small creepers, spared by the frost. This description of a
prison-basin may seem puerile; but Fleur-de-Marie did not lose one of
the details, but with her eyes fixed mournfully on the little verdant
corner, and on this limpid water in which the moving whiteness of the
clouds over the azure of the heavens was reflected, in which the golden
rays of a lovely sun broke with beautiful lustre, she thought with a
sigh of the magnificence of the Nature which she loved, which she
admired so poetically, and of which she was still deprived.

"What did you wish to say to me?" asked La Goualeuse of her companion,
who, seated beside her, was gloomy and silent.

"We must have an explanation," said La Louve, sternly; "things cannot go
on as they are."

"I do not understand you, La Louve."

"Just now, in the yard, referring to Mont Saint-Jean, I said to myself,
'I won't give way any more to La Goualeuse,' and yet I do give way now."

"But--"

"But I tell you it cannot continue so."

"In what have I offended you, La Louve?"

"Why, I am not the same person I was when you came here; no, I have
neither courage, strength, nor boldness."

Then suddenly checking herself, La Louve pulled up the sleeve of her
gown, and showing La Goualeuse her white arm, powerful, and covered with
black down, she showed her, on the upper part of it, an indelible
tattooing, representing a blue dagger half plunged in a red heart; over
this emblem were these words:

         MORT AUX LÂCHES!
             MARTIAL
      P. L. V. (_pour la vie_.)
        (DEATH TO COWARDS!
             MARTIAL
            FOR LIFE!)

"Do you see that?" asked La Louve.

"Yes; and it is so shocking, it quite frightens me," said La Goualeuse,
turning away her head.

"When Martial, my lover, wrote, with a red-hot needle, these words on my
arm, 'Death to Cowards!' he thought me brave; if he knew my behaviour
for the last three days, he would stick his knife in my body, as this
dagger is driven into this heart,--and he would be right, for he wrote
here, 'Death to Cowards!' and I am a coward."

"What have you done that is cowardly?"

"Everything."

"Do you regret the good resolution you made just now?"

"Yes."

"I cannot believe you."

"I say I do regret it,--for it is another proof of what you can do with
all of us. Didn't you understand what Mont Saint-Jean meant when she
went on her knees to thank you?"

"What did she say?"

"She said, speaking of you, that with nothing you turned us from evil to
good. I could have throttled her when she said it, for, to our shame, it
was true. Yes, in no time you change us from black to white. We listen
to you,--give way to our first feelings, and are your dupes, as we were
just now."

"My dupe! for having generously succoured this poor woman?"

"Oh, it has nothing to do with all that," exclaimed La Louve, with rage.
"I have never till now stooped my head before a breathing soul. La Louve
is my name, and I am well named: more than one woman bears my marks, and
more than one man, too; and it shall never be said that a little chit
like you can place me beneath her feet."

"Me! and in what way?"

"How do I know! You come here, and first begin by insulting me."

"Insult you?"

"Yes,--you ask who'll have your bread. I first say--_I._ Mont Saint-Jean
did not ask for it till afterwards, and yet you give her the preference.
Enraged at that, I rushed at you with my uplifted knife--"

"And I said to you, 'Kill me, if you like, but do not let me linger
long,' and that is all."

"That is all? Yes, that is all. And yet these words made me drop my
knife,--made me--ask your pardon,--yes, pardon of you who insulted me.
Is that natural? Why, when I recovered my senses, I was ashamed of
myself. The evening you came here, when you were on your knees to say
your prayers,--why, instead of making game of you, and setting all the
dormitory on you, did I say, 'Let her alone; she prays, and has a right
to pray?' Then the next day, why were I and all the others ashamed to
dress ourselves before you?"

"I do not know, La Louve."

"Indeed!" replied the violent creature, with irony. "You don't know!
Why, no doubt, it is because, as we have all of us said, jokingly, that
you are of a different sort from us. You think so, don't you?"

"I have never said that I thought so."

"No, you have not said so; but you behave just as if it were so."

"I beg of you to listen to me."

"No, I have been already too foolish to listen to you--to look at you.
Till now, I never envied any one. Well, two or three times I have been
surprised at myself. Am I growing a fool or a coward? I have found
myself envious of your face, so like the Holy Virgin's; of your gentle
and mournful look. Yes, I have even been envious of your chestnut hair
and your blue eyes. I, who detest fair women, because I am dark myself,
wish to resemble you. I! La Louve! I! Why, it is but eight days since,
and I would have marked any one who dared but say so. Yet it is not your
lot that would tempt one, for you are as full of grief as a Magdalene.
Is it natural, I say, eh?"

"How can I account to you for the impression I make upon you?"

"Oh, you know well enough what you do, though you look as if you were
too delicate to be touched."

"What bad design can you suppose me capable of?"

"How can I tell? It is because I do not understand anything of all this
that I mistrust you. Another thing, too: until now I have always been
merry or passionate, and never thoughtful, but you--you have made me
thoughtful. Yes, there are words which you utter, that, in spite of
myself, have shaken my very heart, and made me think of all sorts of sad
things."

"I am sorry, La Louve, if I ever made you sad; but I do not remember
ever having said anything--"

"Oh," cried La Louve, interrupting her companion with angry impatience,
"what you do is sometimes as affecting as what you say! You are so
clever!"

"Do not be angry, La Louve, but explain what you mean."

"Yesterday, in the workroom, I noticed you,--you bent your head over the
work you were sewing, and a large tear fell on your hand. You looked at
it for a minute, and then you lifted your hand to your lips, as if to
kiss and wipe it away. Is this true?"

"Yes," said La Goualeuse, blushing.

"There was nothing in this; but at the moment you looked so unhappy, so
very miserable, that I felt my very heart turned, as it were, inside
out. Tell me, do you find this amusing? Why, now, I have been as hard as
flint on all occasions. No one ever saw me shed a tear,--and yet, only
looking at your chit face, I felt my heart sink basely within me! Yes,
for this is baseness,--pure cowardice; and the proof is, that for three
days I have not dared to write to Martial, my lover, my conscience is so
bad. Yes, being with you has enfeebled my mind, and this must be put an
end to,--there's enough of it; this will else do me mischief, I am sure.
I wish to remain as I am, and not become a joke and despised thing to
myself."

"You are angry with me, La Louve?"

"Yes, you are a bad acquaintance for me; and if it continues, why, in a
fortnight's time, instead of calling me the She-wolf, they would call me
the Ewe! But no, thank ye, it sha'n't come to that yet,--Martial would
kill me; and so, to make an end of this matter, I will break up all
acquaintance with you; and that I may be quite separated from you, I
shall ask to be put in another room. If they refuse me, I will do some
piece of mischief to put me in wind again, and that I may be sent to the
black-hole for the remainder of my time here. And this was what I had to
say to you, Goualeuse."

Timidly taking her companion's hand, who looked at her with gloomy
distrust, Fleur-de-Marie said:

"I am sure, La Louve, that you take an interest in me, not because you
are cowardly, but because you are generous-hearted. Brave hearts are the
only ones which sympathise in the misfortunes of others."

"There is neither generosity nor courage in it," said La Louve,
coarsely; "it is downright cowardice. Besides, I don't choose to have it
said that I sympathise with any one. It ain't true."

"Then I will not say so, La Louve; but since you have taken an interest
in me, you will let me feel grateful to you, will you not?"

"Oh, if you like! This evening, I shall be in another room than yours,
or alone in the dark hole, and I shall soon be out, thank God!"

"And where shall you go when you leave here?"

"Why, home, to be sure, to the Rue Pierre-Lescat. I have my furniture
there."

"And Martial?" said La Goualeuse, who hoped to keep up the conversation
with La Louve, by interesting her in what she most cared for; "shall you
be glad to see him again?"

"Yes, oh, yes!" she replied, with a passionate air. "When I was taken
up, he was just recovering from an illness,--a fever which he had from
being always in the water. For seventeen days and seventeen nights I
never left him for a moment, and I sold half my kit in order to pay the
doctor, the drags and all. I may boast of that, and I do boast of it. If
my man lives, it is I who saved him. Yesterday I burnt another candle
for him. It is folly,--a mere whim,--but yet it is all one, and we have
sometimes very good effects in burning candles for a person's recovery."

"And, Martial, where is he now? What is he doing?"

"He is still on an island, near the bridge, at Asnières."

"On an island?"

"Yes, he is settled there, with his family, in a lone house. He is
always at loggerheads with the persons who protect the fishing; but when
he is once in his boat, with his double-barrelled gun, why, they who
approach him had better look out!" said La Louve, proudly.

"What, then, is his occupation?"

"He poaches in the night; and then, as he is as bold as a lion, when
some coward wishes to get up a quarrel with another, why, he will lend
his hand."

"Where did you first know Martial?"

"At Paris. He wished to be a locksmith,--a capital business,--always
with red-hot iron and fire around you; dangerous you may suppose, but
then that suited him. But he, like me, was badly disposed, and could not
agree with his master; and then, too, they were always throwing his
father and one of his brothers in his teeth. But that's nothing to you.
The end of it was, that he returned to his mother, who is a very devil
in sin and wickedness, and began to poach on the river. He cannot see me
at Paris, and in the daytime I go to see him in his island, the Ile du
Ravageur, near Asnières. It's very near; though if it were farther off,
I would go all the same, even if I went on my hands and knees, or swam
all the way, for I can swim like an otter."

"You must be very happy to go into the country," said La Goualeuse, with
a sigh; "especially if you are as fond as I am of walking in the
fields."

"I prefer walking in the woods and large forests with my man."

"In the forests! Oh, ain't you afraid?"

"Afraid! Oh, yes, afraid! I should think so! What can a she-wolf fear?
The thicker and more lonely the forest, the better I should like it. A
lone hut in which I should live with Martial as a poacher, to go with
him at night to set the snares for the game, and then, if the keepers
came to apprehend us, to fire at them, both of us, whilst my man and I
were hid in underwood,--ah, that would indeed be happiness!"

"Then you have lived in the woods, La Louve?"

"Never."

"Who gave you these ideas, then?"

"Martial."

"How did he acquire them?"

"He was a poacher in the forest of Rambouillet; and it is not a year ago
that he was supposed to have fired at a keeper who had fired at him, the
vagabond! However, there was no proof of the fact, but Martial was
obliged to leave that part of the country. Then he came to Paris to try
and be a locksmith, and then I first saw him. As he was too wild to be
on good terms with his master, he preferred returning to his relations
at Asnières, and poach in the river; it is not so slavish. Still he
always regrets the woods, and some day or other will return to them.
From his talking to me of poaching and forests, he has crammed my head
with these ideas, and I now think that is the life I was born for. But
it is always so. What your man likes, you like. If Martial had been a
thief, I should have been a thief. When one has a man, we like to be
like him."

"And where are your own relations, La Louve?"

"How should I know?"

"Is it long since you saw them?"

"I don't know whether they are dead or alive."

"Were they, then, so very unkind to you?"

"Neither kind nor unkind. I was about eleven years old, I think, when my
mother went off with a soldier. My father, who was a day-labourer,
brought home a mistress with him into our garret, and two boys she
had,--one six, and the other my own age. She was a barrow-woman. She
went on pretty well at first, but after a time, whilst she was out with
her fruit, a fish-woman used to come and drink with my father, and this
the apple-woman found out. Then, from this time, every evening, we had
such battles and rows in the house that I and the two boys were half
dead with fright. We all three slept together, for we had but one room.
One day,--it was her birthday, Sainte Madeleine's fête,--and she scolded
him because he had not congratulated her on it. From one word another
arose, and my father concluded by breaking her head with the handle of
the broom. I really thought he had killed her. She fell like a lump of
lead, but _la mère_ Madeleine was hard-lived, and hard-headed also.
After that she returned my father with interest all the blows he had
given her, and once bit him so savagely in the hand that the piece of
flesh remained between her teeth. I must say that these contests were
what we may call the _grandes eaux_ at Versailles. On common and
working-days the skirmishes were of a lighter sort,--there were
bruises, but no blood."

"Was this woman unkind to you?"

"Mère Madeleine? No; on the contrary. She was a little hasty, but,
otherwise, a good sort of woman enough. But at last my father got tired,
and left her and the little furniture we had. He came out of Burgundy,
and most probably returned to his own country. I was fifteen or sixteen
at this time."

"And were you still with the old mistress of your father?"

"Where else should I be? Then she took up with a tiler, who came to
lodge with us. Of the two boys of Mère Madeleine, one, the eldest, was
drowned at the Ile des Cygnes, and the other went apprentice to a
carpenter."

"And what did you do with this woman?"

"Oh, I helped to draw her barrow, made the soup, and carried her man his
dinner; and when he came home drunk, which happened oftener than was his
turn, I helped Mère Madeleine to keep him in order, for we still lived
in the same apartment. He was as vicious as a sandy-haired donkey, when
he was tipsy, and tried to kill us. Once, if we had not snatched his axe
from him, he would certainly have murdered us both. Mère Madeleine had a
cut on the shoulder, which bled till the room looked like a
slaughter-house."

"And how did you become--what--we--are?" said Fleur-de-Marie,
hesitatingly.

"Why, little Charley, Madeleine's son, who was afterwards drowned at the
Ile des Cygnes, was my first lover, almost from the time when he, his
mother, and his brother, came to lodge with us when we were but mere
children; after him the tiler was my lover, who threatened else to turn
me out-of-doors. I was afraid that Mère Madeleine would also send me
away if she discovered anything. She did, however; but as she was
really a good creature, she said, 'As it is so, and you are sixteen
years old, and fit for nothing, for you are too self-willed to take a
situation or learn a business, you shall go with me and be inscribed in
the police-books; as you have no relations, I will answer for you, as I
brought you up, as one may say; and that will give you a position
authorised by the government, and you will have nothing to do but to be
merry and dress smart. I shall have no uneasiness about you, and you
will no longer be a charge to me. What do you say to it, my girl?' 'Why,
I think indeed you are right,' was my answer; 'I had not thought of
that.' Well, we went to the Bureau des Moeurs. She answered for me, in
the usual way, and from that time I was _inscrite_. I met Mère Madeleine
a year afterwards. I was drinking with my man, and we asked her to join
us, and she told us that the tiler had been sentenced to the galleys.
Since then I have never seen her, but some one, I don't remember who,
declared that she had been seen at the Morgue three months ago. If it
were true, really so much the worse, for Mère Madeleine was a good sort
of woman,--her heart was in her hand, and she had no more gall than a
pigeon."

Fleur-de-Marie, though plunged young in an atmosphere of corruption, had
subsequently breathed so pure an air that she experienced a deeply
painful sensation at the horrid recital of La Louve. And if we have had
the sad courage to make it, it has been because all the world should
know that, hideous as it is, it is still a thousand times less revolting
than other countless realities.

Ignorance and misery often conduct the lower classes to these fearful
degradations, human and social.

Yes; there is a crowd of hovels and dens, where children and adults,
girls and boys, legitimate children and bastards, lying pell-mell on the
same mattress, have continually before their eyes these infamous
examples of drunkenness, violence, debauch, and murder. Yes, and too
frequently unnatural crimes at the tenderest age add to this
accumulation of horrors.

The rich may shroud their vices in shadow and mystery, and respect the
sanctity of the domestic hearth, but the most honest artisans, occupying
nearly always a single chamber with their family, are compelled, from
want of beds and space, to make their children sleep together, sons and
daughters, close to themselves, husbands and wives.

If we shudder at the fatal consequences of such necessity almost
inevitably imposed on poor, but honest artisans, what must it be with
workpeople depraved by ignorance or misconduct? What fearful examples do
they not present to unhappy children, abandoned, or rather excited, from
their tenderest youth to every brutal impulse and animal propensity?
Have they even the idea of what is right, decent, and modest? Must they
not be as strange to social laws as the savages of the New World? Poor
creatures! Corrupted at their very birth, who in the prisons, whither
their wanderings and idleness often lead them, are already stigmatised
by the coarse and terrible metaphor, "Graines de Bagne" (Seeds of the
Gaol)! and the metaphor is a correct one. This sinister prediction is
almost invariably accomplished: the Galleys or the Bridewell, each sex
has its destiny.

We do not intend here to justify any profligacy. Let us only compare the
voluntary degradation of a female carefully educated in the bosom of a
wealthy family, which has set her none but the most virtuous examples.
Let us compare, we say, this degradation with that of La Louve, a
creature, as it were, reared in vice, by vice, and for vice, and to whom
is pointed out, not without reason, prostitution as a condition
protected by the government! This is true. There is a bureau where she
is registered, certificated, and signs her name. A bureau where a
mother has a right to authorise the prostitution of her daughter; a
husband the prostitution of his wife. This place is termed the "Bureau
des Moeurs" (the Office of Manners). Must not society have a vice most
deeply rooted, incurable in the place of the laws which regulate
marriage, when power,--yes, power,--that grave and moral abstraction, is
obliged, not only to tolerate, but to regulate, to legalise, to protect,
to render it less injurious and dangerous, this sale of body and soul;
which, multiplied by the unbridled appetites of an immense population,
acquires daily an almost incalculable amount.

       *       *       *       *       *

Goualeuse, repressing the emotion which this sad confession of her
companion had made in her, said to her, timidly:

"Listen to me without being angry."

"Well, what have you to say? I think I have gossiped enough; but it is
no matter, as it is the last time we shall talk together."

"Are you happy, La Louve?"

"What do you mean?"

"Does the life you lead make you happy?"

"Here,--at St. Lazare?"

"No; when you are at home and free."

"Yes, I am happy."

"Always?"

"Always."

"You would not change your life for any other?"

"For any other? What--what other life can there be for me?"

"Tell me, La Louve," continued Fleur-de-Marie, after a moment's silence,
"don't you sometimes like to build castles in the air? It is so amusing
in prison."

"Castles in the air! About what?"

"About Martial."

"About my man?"

"Yes."

"_Ma foi!_ I never built any."

"Let me build one for you and Martial."

"Bah! What's the use of it?"

"To pass away time."

"Well, let's have your castle in the air."

"Well, then, only imagine that a lucky chance, such as sometimes occurs,
brings you in contact with a person who says, 'Forsaken by your father
and mother, your infancy was surrounded by such bad examples that you
must be pitied, as much as blamed, for having become--'"

"Become what?"

"What you and I have become," replied Goualeuse, in a soft voice; and
then she continued, "Suppose, then, that this person were to say to you,
'You love Martial; he loves you. Do you and he cease to lead an improper
life,--instead of being his mistress, become his wife.'"

La Louve shrugged her shoulders.

"Do you think he would have me for his wife?"

"Except poaching, he has never committed any guilty act, has he?"

"No; he is a poacher in the river, as he was in the woods, and he is
right. Why, now, ain't fish like game, for those to have who can catch
them? Where do they bear the proprietor's mark?"

"Well, suppose that, having given up the dangerous trade of marauding on
the river, he desires to become an honest man; suppose he inspires, by
the frankness of his good resolutions, so much confidence in an unknown
benefactor that he gives him a situation,--let us see, our castle is in
the air,--gives him a situation--say as gamekeeper, for instance. Why, I
should suppose that, as he had been a poacher, nothing could better suit
his taste; it is the same occupation, but in the right way."

"Yes, _ma foi!_ it would be still to live in the woods."

"Only he would not have the situation but on condition that he would
marry you, and take you with him."

"I go with Martial?"

"Yes; why, you said you should be so happy to live together in the
depths of the forest. Shouldn't you prefer, instead of the miserable hut
of the poacher, in which you would hide like guilty creatures, to have a
neat little cottage, which you would take care of as the active and
hard-working housekeeper?"

"You are making game of me. Can this be possible?"

"Who knows what may happen? But it's only a castle in the air."

"Ah, if it's only that, all very well!"

"La Louve, I think that I already see you established in your little
home in the depths of the forest, with your husband and two or three
children. Children,--what happiness! Are they not?"

"The children of my man!" exclaimed La Louve, with intense eagerness.
"Ah, yes! They would be dearly loved,--they would!"

"How they would keep you company in your solitude! And, then, when they
grew up they would be able to render you great service: the youngest
would pick up the dead branches for fuel; the eldest would go into the
grass of the forest to watch a cow or two, which they would give you as
a reward for your husband's activity, for as he had been a poacher he
would make a better keeper."

"To be sure; that's true enough. But really your castles in the air are
very amusing. Go on, Goualeuse."

"They would be very much satisfied with your husband, and you would have
some allowances from your master, a poultry-yard, a garden; and, in
fact, you would have to work very hard, La Louve, from morning till
night."

"Oh, if that were all, if I once had my good man near me, I should not
be afraid of work! I have stout arms."

"And you would have plenty to employ them, I will answer for that. There
is so much to do,--so much to do! There is the stable to clean, the
meals to get ready, the clothes to mend; to-day is washing day, next day
there's the bread to bake, or perhaps the house to clean from top to
bottom; and, then, the other keepers would say, 'There is no such
manager as Martial's wife; from the cellar to the garret, in her house,
it is a pattern of cleanliness, and the children are taken such care of!
But then she is so very industrious, Madame Martial.'"

"Really though, La Goualeuse, is it true? I should call myself Madame
Martial," said La Louve, with a sort of pride,--"Madame Martial!"

"Which is better than being called La Louve,--is it not?"

"_Pardieu!_ Why, there's no doubt but I should rather be called by my
man's name than the name of a wild beast; but--bah!--bah! _louve_ I was
born, _louve_ I shall die!"

"Who knows? Who can say? Not to shrink from a life that is hard, but
honest, will ensure success. So, then, work would not frighten you?"

"Oh, certainly not! It is not a husband and four or five brats to take
care of that would give me any trouble!"

"But then it would not be all work; there are moments for rest. In the
winter evenings, when the children were put to bed, and your husband
smoked his pipe whilst he was cleaning his gun or caressing his dogs,
you would have a little leisure."

"Leisure,--sit with my arms crossed before me! _Ma foi!_ No, I would
rather mend the linen, by the side of the fire in the evening. That is
not a very hard job, and in winter the days are so short."

As Fleur-de-Marie proceeded, La Louve forgot more and more of the
present for the dreams of the future, as deeply interested as La
Goualeuse had been before her, when Rodolph had talked to her of the
rustic delights of the Bouqueval farm. La Louve did not attempt to
conceal the wild tastes with which her lover had inspired her.
Remembering the deep and wholesome impression which she had experienced
from the smiling picture of Rodolph in relation to a country life,
Fleur-de-Marie was desirous of trying the same means of action on La
Louve, thinking, with reason, that, if her companion was so far affected
at the sketch of a rude, poor, and solitary life, as to desire ardently
such an existence, she merited interest and pity. Delighted to see her
companion listen to her with attention, La Goualeuse continued, smiling:

"And then you see, Madame Martial,--let me call you so,--what does it
matter--"

"Quite the contrary; it flatters me." Then La Louve shrugged her
shoulders, and, smiling, also added, "What folly to play at madame! Are
we children? Well, it's all the same; go on,--it's quite amusing. You
said--"

"I was saying, Madame Martial, that in speaking of your life, the winter
in the thickest of the woods, we were only alluding to the worst of the
seasons."

"_Ma foi!_ No, that is not the worst. To hear the wind whistle all night
in the forest, and the wolves howl from time to time far off, very far
off,--I shouldn't tire of that; provided I was at the fireside with my
man and my children, or even quite alone, if my man was going his
rounds. Ah, I am not afraid of a gun! If I had my children to defend, I
could do that,--the wolf would guard her cubs!"

"Oh, I can well believe you! You are very brave--you are; but I am a
coward. I prefer spring to the winter, when the leaves are green, when
the pretty wild flowers bloom, and they smell so sweet, so sweet that
the air is quite scented; and then your children would roll about so
merrily in the fresh grass; and then the forest would be so thick that
you could hardly see your house in the midst of the foliage,--I can
fancy that I see it now. In front of the house is a vine full of leaves,
which your husband has planted, and which shades the bank of turf where
he sleeps during the noonday heat, whilst you are going backwards and
forwards desiring the children not to wake their father. I don't know
whether you have remarked it, but in the heat of summer about midday
there is in the woods as deep silence as at midnight, you don't hear the
leaves shake, nor the birds sing."

"Yes, that's true," replied La Louve, almost mechanically, who became
more and more forgetful of the reality, and almost believed she saw
before her the smiling pictures which the poetical imagination of
Fleur-de-Marie, so instinctively amorous of the beauties of nature,
presented before her.

Delighted at the deep attention which her companion lent her, La
Goualeuse continued, allowing herself to be drawn on by the charm of the
thoughts which she called up:

"There is one thing which I love almost as well as the silence of the
woods, and that is the noise of the heavy drops of rain falling on the
leaves; do you like that, too?"

"Oh, yes! I am very fond of a summer shower."

"So am I; and when the trees, the moss, and the grass, are all
moistened, what a delightfully fresh odour they give out! And then, how
the sun, as it passes over the trees, makes all the little drops of
water glisten as they hang from the leaves! Have you ever noticed that?"

"Yes; I remember it now because you tell me of it. Yet, how droll all
this is! But, Goualeuse, you talk so well that one seems to see
everything,--to see everything just as you talk; and then, I really do
not know how to explain it all. But now, what you say seems good, it is
quite pleasant,--just like the rain we were talking of."

"Oh, don't suppose that we are the only creatures who love a summer
shower! The dear little birds, how delighted they are! How they shake
their feathers, whilst they warble so joyously; not more joyously,
though, than your children,--your children as free, and gay, and
light-hearted as they! And then, look! as the day declines the youngest
children run across the wood to meet the elder, who brings back the two
heifers from pasture, for they have heard the tinkling of the bell in
the distance!"

"Yes, Goualeuse, and I think I see the smallest and boldest, whom his
brother has put astride on the back of one of the cows."

"And one would say that the poor animal knows what burden she bears, she
steps so carefully. But it is supper-time; your eldest child, whilst he
has been tending the cows at pasture, has amused himself with gathering
for you a basket of beautiful strawberries, which he has brought quite
fresh under a thick covering of wild violets."

"Strawberries and violets,--ah, what a lovely smell they have! But where
the deuce did you find all these ideas, La Goualeuse?"

"In the woods, where the strawberries ripen and the violets blow, you
have only to look and gather them--But let us go on with our
housekeeping. It is night, and you must milk your heifers, prepare your
supper under the shelter of the vine, for you hear your husband's dogs
bark, and then their master's voice, who, tired as he is, comes home
singing,--and who could not sing when on a fine summer's eve with
cheerful heart you return to the house where a good wife and five
children are waiting for you?--eh, Madame Martial?"

"True, true; one could not but sing," replied La Louve, becoming more
and more thoughtful.

"Unless one weeps for joy," continued Fleur-de-Marie, herself much
touched, "and such tears are as sweet as songs. And then, when night has
completely come, what a pleasure to sit in the arbour and enjoy the
calmness of a fine evening, to breathe the sweet odour of the forest,
to hear the prattle of the children, to look at the stars, then the
heart is so full,--so full that it must pour out its prayer; it must
thank him to whom we are indebted for the freshness of the evening, the
sweet scent of the woods, the gentle brightness of the starry sky! After
this thanksgiving or this prayer, we go to sleep tranquilly till the
next day, and then again thank our Creator. And this poor, hard-working,
but calm and honest life, is the same each and every day."

"Every day!" repeated La Louve, with her head drooping on her chest, her
look fixed, her breast oppressed, "for it is true the good God is good
to give us wherewithal to live upon, and to make us happy with so
little."

"Well, tell me now," continued Fleur-de-Marie, gently,--"tell me, ought
not he to be blessed, after God, who should give you this peaceable and
laborious life, instead of the wretched existence you lead in the mud of
the streets of Paris?"

This word Paris suddenly recalled La Louve to reality.

A strange phenomenon had taken place in the mind of this creature.

The simple painting of a humble and rude condition--the mere recital by
turns--lighted up by the soft rays from the domestic hearth, gilded by
some joyful sunbeams, refreshed by the breeze of the great woods, or
perfumed by the odour of wild flowers,--this narrative had made on La
Louve a more profound or more sensible impression than could an
exhortation of the most pious morality have effected.

In truth, in proportion as Fleur-de-Marie spoke, La Louve had longed to
be, and meant to be, an indefatigable manager, a worthy wife, an
affectionate and devoted mother.

To inspire, even for an instant, a violent, immoral, and degraded woman
with a love of home, respect for duty, a taste for labour, and gratitude
towards her Creator; and that, by only promising her what God gives to
all, the sun, the sky, and the depths of the forest,--what society owes
to those who lack a roof and a loaf,--was, indeed, a glorious triumph
for Fleur-de-Marie! Could the most severe moralist--the most
overpowering preacher--have obtained more in threatening, in their
monotonous and menacing orations, all human vengeances--all divine
thunders?

The painful anger with which La Louve was possessed when she returned to
the reality, after having allowed herself to be charmed by the new and
wholesome reverie in which, for the first time, Fleur-de-Marie had
plunged her, proved the influence of her words on her unfortunate
companion. The more bitter were La Louve's regrets when she fell back
from this consoling delusion to the horrors of her real position, the
greater was La Goualeuse's triumph. After a moment's silence and
reflection, La Louve raised her head suddenly, passed her hand over her
brow, and rose threatening and angry.

"See, see! I had reason to mistrust you, and to desire not to listen to
you, because it would turn to ill for me! Why did you talk thus to me?
Why make a jest of me? Why mock me? And because I have been so weak as
to say to you that I should like to live in the depths of a forest with
my man. Who are you, then, that you should make a fool of me in this
way? You, miserable girl, don't know what you have done! Now, in spite
of myself, I shall always be thinking of this forest, the house,
and--and--the children--and all that happiness which I shall never
have--never--never! And if I cannot forget what you have told me, why,
my life will be one eternal punishment,--a hell,--and that by your
fault! Yes, by your fault!"

"So much the better! Oh, so much the better!" said Fleur-de-Marie.

"You say, so much the better!" exclaimed La Louve, with her eyes
glaring.

"Yes,--so much the better! For if your present miserable life appears to
you a hell, you will prefer that of which I have spoken to you."

"What is the use of preferring it, since it is not destined for me? What
is the use of regretting that I walk the streets, since I shall die in
the streets?" exclaimed La Louve, more and more irritated, and taking in
her powerful grasp the small hand of Fleur-de-Marie. "Answer--answer!
Why do you try to make me desire that which I cannot have."

"To desire an honest and industrious life is to be worthy of that life,
as I have already told you," replied Fleur-de-Marie, without attempting
to disengage her hand.

"Well, and what then? Suppose I am worthy, what does that prove? How
much the better off will that make me?"

"To see realised what you consider as a dream," answered Fleur-de-Marie,
in a tone so serious and full of conviction that La Louve, again under
control, let go La Goualeuse's hand, and gazed at her in amazement.

"Listen to me, La Louve," said Fleur-de-Marie, in a voice full of
feeling; "do you think me so wicked as to excite such ideas and hopes in
you, if I were not sure that, whilst I made you blush at your present
condition, I gave you the means to quit it?"

"You! You can do this?"

"I! No; but some one who is good, and great, and powerful."

"Great and powerful?"

"Listen, La Louve. Three months ago I was, like you, a lost, an
abandoned creature. One day he of whom I speak to you with tears of
gratitude,"--and Fleur-de-Marie wiped her eyes,--"one day he came to me,
and he was not afraid, abased and despised as I was, to say comforting
words to me, the first I had ever heard. I told him my sufferings, my
miseries, my shame; I concealed nothing from him, just as you have
related to me all your past life, La Louve. After having listened to me
with kindness, he did not blame, but pitied me; he did not even reproach
me with my disgraceful position, but talked to me of the calm and pure
life which was found in the country."

"As you did just now?"

"Then my situation appeared to me the more frightful, in proportion as
the future he held out to me seemed more beautiful."

"Like me?"

"Yes, and so I said as you did,--What use, alas! is it to make me fancy
this paradise,--me, who am chained to hell? But I was wrong to despair;
for he of whom I speak is so good, so just, that he is incapable of
making a false hope shine in the eyes of a poor creature who asked no
one for pity, happiness, or hope."

"And what did he do for you?"

"He treated me like a sick child. I was, like you, immersed in a
corrupted air, and he sent me to breathe a wholesome and reviving
atmosphere. I was also living amongst hideous and criminal beings, and
he confided me to persons as good as himself, who have purified my soul
and elevated my mind; for he communicates to all those who love and
respect him a spark of his own refined intelligence. Yes, if my words
move you, La Louve, if my tears make your tears flow, it is that his
mind and thought inspire me. If I speak to you of the happier future
which you will obtain by repentance, it is because I can promise you
this future in his name, although, at this moment, he is ignorant of the
engagement I make. In fact, I say to you, Hope! because he always
listens to the voice of those who desire to become better; for God sent
him on earth to make people believe in his providence!"

[Illustration: _La Goualeuse in the prison._
Original Etching by Adrian Marcel.]

As she spoke, Fleur-de-Marie's countenance became radiant, and her pale
cheeks suffused with a delicate carnation; her beautiful eyes
sparkled, and she appeared so touchingly beautiful that La Louve gazed
on her with respectful admiration, and said:

"Where am I? Do I dream? Who are you, then? Oh, I was right when I said
you were not one of us! But, then, you talk so well,--you, who can do so
much, you, who know such powerful people, how is it that you are here, a
prisoner with us?"

Fleur-de-Marie was about to reply, when Madame Armand came up and
interrupted her, to conduct her to Madame d'Harville. La Louve remained
overwhelmed with surprise, and the inspectress said to her:

"I see, with pleasure, that the presence of La Goualeuse in the prison
has brought good fortune to you and your companions. I know you have
made a subscription for poor Mont Saint-Jean; that is kind and
charitable, La Louve, and will be of service to you. I was sure that you
were better than you allowed yourself to appear. In recompense for this
kind action, I think I can promise you that the term of your
imprisonment shall be shortened by several days."

Madame Armand then walked away, followed by Fleur-de-Marie.

       *       *       *       *       *

We must not be astonished at the almost eloquent language of
Fleur-de-Marie, when we remember that her mind, so wonderfully gifted,
had rapidly developed itself, thanks to the education and instruction
she had received at Bouqueval farm.

The young girl was, indeed, strong in her experience.

The sentiments she had awakened in the heart of La Louve had been
awakened in her own heart by Rodolph, and under almost similar
circumstances.

Believing that she detected some good instincts in her companion, she
had endeavoured to lure her back to honesty, by proving to her
(according to Rodolph's theory, applied to the farm at Bouqueval) that
it was her interest to become honest, by pointing out to her restitution
to the paths of rectitude in smiling and attractive colours.

And here let us repeat that, in our opinion, an incomplete as well as
stupid and inefficacious mode is employed to inspire the poor and
ignorant classes with a hatred of evil and a love of good.

In order to turn them away from the bad path, they are incessantly
threatened with divine and human vengeance; incessantly a sinister clank
is sounded in their ears: prison-keep, fetters, handcuffs; and, in the
distance, in dark shadow, at the extreme horizon of crime, they have
their attention directed to the executioner's axe glittering amidst the
glare of everlasting flames. We observe that the intimidation is
constant, fearful, and appalling. To him who does ill, imprisonment,
infamy, punishment. This is just. But to him who does well does society
award noble gifts, glorious distinctions? No.

Does society encourage resignation, order, probity, in that immense mass
of artisans who are for ever doomed to toil and privation, and almost
always to profound misery, by benevolent rewards? No.

Is the scaffold which the criminal ascends a protection for the man of
integrity? No.

Strange and fatal symbol! Justice is represented as blind, bearing in
one hand a sword to punish, and in the other scales in which she weighs
accusation and defence. This is not the image of Justice. This is the
image of Law, or, rather, of the man who condemns or acquits according
to his conscience. Justice should hold in one hand a sword, and in the
other a crown,--one to strike the wicked, and the other to recompense
the good. The people would then see that, if there is a terrible
punishment for evil, there is a brilliant recompense for good; whilst as
it is, in their plain and simple sense, the people seek in vain for the
contrary side of tribunals, gaols, galleys, and scaffolds. The people
see plainly a criminal justice, consisting of upright, inflexible,
enlightened men, always employed in searching out, detecting, and
punishing the evil-doers. They do not see the virtuous justice,
consisting of upright, inflexible, and enlightened men, always searching
out and rewarding the honest man. All says to him, Tremble! Nothing says
to him, Hope! All threatens him; nothing consoles him!

The state annually expends many millions for the sterile punishment of
crimes. With this enormous sum it keeps prisoners and gaolers,
galley-slaves and galley-sergeants, scaffolds and executioners. This is
necessary? Agreed. But how much does the state disburse for the rewards
(so salutary, so fruitful) for honest men? Nothing. And this is not all,
as we shall demonstrate when the course of this recital shall conduct us
to the state prison; how many artisans of irreproachable honesty would
attain the summit of their wishes if they were assured of enjoying one
day the bodily comforts of prisoners, always certain of good food, good
bed, and good shelter? And yet, in the name of their dignity, as honest
men, long and painfully tried, have they not a right to claim the same
care and comforts as criminals,--such, for instance, as Morel, the
lapidary, who had toiled for twenty years, industrious, honest, and
resigned, in the midst of bitter misery and sore temptations? Do not
such men deserve sufficiently well of society, that society should try
and find them out, and if not recompense them, for the honour of
humanity, at least support them in the painful and difficult path which
they tread so courageously? Is the man of worth so modest that he finds
greater security than the thief or assassin? and are not these always
detected by criminal justice? Alas, it is a utopia, but it is consoling!

Suppose, for the moment, a society were so organised that it would hold
an assizes of virtue, as we have assizes of crime,--a public ministry
pointing out noble actions, disclosing them to the view of all, as we
now denounce crimes to the avenging power of the laws. We will give two
instances--two justices--and let our readers say which is most fruitful
in instruction, in consequences, in positive results. One man has killed
another, for the purpose of robbing him; at break of day they stealthily
erect the guillotine in an obscure corner of Paris and cut off the
assassin's head before the dregs of the populace, which laughs at the
judge, the sufferer, and the executioner. This is the last resort of
society. This is the chastisement she bestows on the greatest crime
which can be committed against her. This is the most terrible, the most
wholesome warning she can give to her population,--the only one, for
there is no counterpoise to this keen axe, dripping with blood; no,
society has no spectacle, mild and benevolent, to oppose to this
funereal scene.

Let us go on with our utopia. Would it not be otherwise if almost every
day the people had before their eyes some illustrious virtues greatly
glorified and substantially rewarded by the state? Would it not be to
encourage good continually, if we often saw an august, imposing, and
venerable tribunal summon before it, in presence of an immense
multitude, a poor and honest artisan, whose long, intelligent, and
enduring life should be described, whilst he was thus addressed:

"For twenty years you have manfully struggled against misfortune, your
family has been brought up by you in the principles of honour and
rectitude, your superior virtues have greatly distinguished you,--you
merit praise and recompense. Society, always vigilant, just, and
all-powerful, never leaves in oblivion either good or evil. Every man is
recompensed according to his works. The state assures to you a pension
sufficient for your wants. Obtaining this deserved mark of public
notice, you will end in leisure and ease a life which is an example to
all; and thus are and will be exalted those who, like yourself, shall
have struggled for many years with an admirable persistence in good, and
given proof of rare and grand moral qualities. Your example will
encourage a great many to imitate you; hope will lighten the painful
burden which their destiny imposes on them for so many years of their
life. Animated by a salutary emulation, they will energetically struggle
to accomplish the most arduous duties, in order that one day they may be
distinguished from the rest, and rewarded as you are."

We ask, which of the two sights--the beheaded assassin, or the good man
rewarded--would act on the million with more salutary and more fruitful
effect?

No doubt many delicate minds will be indignant at the bare thought of
these ignoble substantial rewards awarded to the most ethereal thing in
the world,--Virtue! They will find all sorts of arguments, more or less
philosophical, platonic, theological, and especially economic, against
such a proposition; such as, "Virtue is its own reward;" "Virtue is a
priceless gem;" "The satisfaction of the conscience is the noblest of
recompenses;" and, finally, this triumphant and unanswerable objection,
"The eternal happiness which awaits the just in another life ought to be
sufficient to encourage mankind to do well." To this we reply that
society, in order to intimidate and punish the guilty, does not appear
to us to rely entirely and exclusively on the divine vengeance, which
they tell us will visit them in another world. Society anticipates the
last judgment by human judgments. Awaiting the inexorable hour of the
archangels in armour, with sounding trumpets and fiery swords, society
modestly comforts herself with--_gens-d'armes_.

We repeat, to terrify the wicked, we materialise, or rather we reduce to
human, perceptible, and visible proportions, the anticipated effects of
divine wrath. Why should we not do the same with the divine rewards to
worthy and virtuous people?

       *       *       *       *       *

But let us leave these mad, absurd, stupid, impracticable utopianisms,
like real utopianisms, as they are. Society is as well as it is. Ask
those merry souls, who, with uncertain step, stupid look, and noisy
laugh, have just quitted the gay banquet, if it is not.




CHAPTER XII.

THE PROTECTRESS.


The inspectress soon entered with Goualeuse into the little room where
Clémence was staying. The pale cheek of the young girl was still
slightly coloured in consequence of her conversation with La Louve.

"Madame la Marquise, pleased with the excellent character I have given
of you," said Madame Armand to Fleur-de-Marie, "has desired to see you,
and will, perhaps, be so good as to have you released from here before
the expiration of your time."

"I thank you, madame," replied Fleur-de-Marie, timidly, to Madame
Armand, who left her alone with the marchioness.

The latter, struck by the candid expression of her protégée's features,
and by her carriage, so full of grace and modesty, could not help
remembering that La Goualeuse had pronounced the name of Rodolph in her
sleep, and that the inspectress believed the youthful prisoner to be a
prey to deep and hidden love. Although perfectly convinced that it could
not be a question as to the Grand Duke Rodolph, Clémence acknowledged to
herself that, with regard to beauty, La Goualeuse was worthy of a
prince's love.

At the sight of her protectress, whose physiognomy, as we have said,
displayed excessive goodness, Fleur-de-Marie felt herself
sympathetically attracted towards her.

"My girl," said Clémence to her, "whilst commending the gentleness of
your disposition and the discreetness of your behaviour, Madame Armand
complains of your want of confidence in her."

Fleur-de-Marie bowed her look, but did not reply.

"The peasant's dress in which you were clad when you were apprehended,
your silence on the subject of the place where you resided before you
were brought here, prove that you conceal certain particulars from us."

"Madame--"

"I have no right to your confidence, my poor child, nor would I ask you
any question that would distress you; but, as I am assured that if I
request your discharge from prison it will be accorded to me, before I
do so I should wish to talk to you of your own plans, your resources for
the future. Once free, what do you propose to do? If, as I doubt not,
you decide on following the good path you have already entered upon,
have confidence in me, and I will put you in the way of gaining an
honest subsistence."

La Goualeuse was moved to tears at the interest which Madame d'Harville
evinced for her. After a moment's hesitation, she replied:

"You are very good, madame, to show so much benevolence towards me,--so
generous, that I ought, perhaps, to break the silence which I have
hitherto kept on the past, to which I was forced by an oath--"

"An oath?"

"Yes, madame, I have sworn to be secret to justice, and the persons
employed in this prison, as to the series of events by which I was
brought hither. Yet, madame, if you will make me a promise--"

"Of what nature?"

"To keep my secret. I may, thanks to you, madame, without breaking my
oath, comfort most worthy persons who, no doubt, are excessively uneasy
on my account."

"Rely on my discretion. I will only say what you authorise me to
disclose."

"Oh, thanks, madame! I was so fearful that my silence towards my
benefactors would appear like ingratitude!"

The gentle accents of Fleur-de-Marie, and her well-selected phrases,
struck Madame d'Harville with fresh surprise.

"I will not conceal from you," said she, "that your demeanour, your
language, all surprise me in a remarkable degree. How could you, with an
education which appears polished,--how could you--"

"Fall so low, you would say, madame?" said Goualeuse, with bitterness.
"Alas! It is but a very short time that I have received this education.
I owe this benefit to a generous protector, who, like you, madame,
without knowing me, without even having the favourable recommendation
which you have received in my favour, took pity upon me--"

"And who is this protector?"

"I do not know, madame."

"You do not know?"

"He only makes himself known, they tell me, by his inexhaustible
goodness. Thanks be to Heaven, he found me in his path!"

"And when did you first meet?"

"One night,--in the Cité, madame," said Goualeuse, lowering her eyes, "a
man was going to beat me; this unknown benefactor defended me
courageously; this was my first meeting with him."

"Then he was one of the people?"

"The first time I saw him he had the dress and language; but
afterwards--"

"Afterwards?"

"The way in which he spoke to me, the profound respect with which he was
treated by the persons to whom he confided me, all proved to me that he
had only assumed the exterior disguise of one of the men who are seen
about the Cité."

"But with what motive?"

"I do not know."

"And do you know the name of this mysterious protector?"

"Oh, yes, madame," said La Goualeuse, with excitement; "thank Heaven!
For I can incessantly bless and adore that name. My preserver is called
M. Rodolph, madame."

Clémence blushed deeply.

"And has he no other name," she asked, quickly, of Fleur-de-Marie.

"I know no other, madame. In the farm, where he sent me, he was only
known as M. Rodolph."

"And his age?"

"Still young, madame."

"And handsome?"

"Oh, yes! Handsome,--noble as his own heart."

The grateful and impassioned accent with which Fleur-de-Marie uttered
these words caused a deeply painful sensation in Madame d'Harville's
bosom. An unconquerable and inexplicable presentiment told her that it
was indeed the prince. "The remarks of the inspectress were just,"
thought Clémence. "Goualeuse loves Rodolph; that was the name which she
pronounced in her sleep. Under what strange circumstance had the prince
and this unfortunate girl met? Why did Rodolph go disguised into the
Cité?"

The marquise could not resolve these questions. She only remembered what
Sarah had wickedly and mendaciously told her as to the pretended
eccentricities of Rodolph. Was it not, in fact, strange that he should
have extricated from the dregs of society a girl of such excessive
loveliness, and evidently so intelligent and sensible?

Clémence had noble qualities, but she was a woman, and deeply loved
Rodolph, although she had resolved to bury that secret in her heart's
very core.

Without reflecting that this was unquestionably but one of those
generous actions which the prince was accustomed to do by stealth,
without considering that she was, perchance, confounding with love a
sentiment that was but excess of gratitude, without considering that,
even if this feeling were more tender, Rodolph must be ignorant of it,
the marchioness, in the first moment of bitterness and injustice, could
not help looking on Goualeuse as her rival. Her pride revolted when she
believed she was suffering, in spite of herself, with such a humiliating
rivalry; and she replied, in a tone so harsh as to contrast cruelly with
the affectionate kindness of her first words:

"And how is it, then, mademoiselle, that your protector leaves you in
prison? How comes it that you are here?"

"Oh, madame," said Fleur-de-Marie, struck at this sudden change of tone,
"have I done anything to displease you?"

"In what could you have displeased me?" asked Madame d'Harville,
haughtily.

"It appeared to me just now that you spoke to me so kindly, madame."

"Really, mademoiselle, is it necessary that I should weigh every word I
utter? Since I take an interest in you, I have, I think, a right to ask
you certain questions!"

Scarcely had Clémence uttered these words, than she regretted their
severity; first from a praiseworthy return of generosity, and then
because she thought by being harsh with her rival she might not learn
any more of what she was so anxious to know. In fact, Goualeuse's
countenance, just now so open and confiding, became suddenly alarmed.
Like the sensitive plant, which, on the first touch, curls up its leaves
and withdraws within itself, the heart of Fleur-de-Marie became
painfully contracted. Clémence replied, gently, in order that she might
not awaken her protégée's suspicions by too sudden a return to a milder
tone:

"Really I must repeat that I cannot understand why, having so much to
praise your benefactor for, you are left here a prisoner. How is it
that, after having returned with all sincerity to the paths of
rectitude, you could have been apprehended, at night, in a forbidden
place? All this, I confess to you, appears to me very extraordinary. You
speak of an oath, which has bound you to silence; but this very oath is
so strange!"

"I have spoken the truth, madame--"

"I am sure of that; it is only to see and hear you to be convinced that
you are incapable of falsehood; but what is so incomprehensible in your
situation makes me the more curious and impatient to have it cleared up;
and to this alone must you attribute the abruptness of my language just
now. I was wrong, I feel I was, for, although I have no claim to your
confidence beyond my anxious desire to be of service to you, yet you
have offered to disclose to me what you have not yet told to any person;
and I can assure you, my poor girl, that this proof of your confidence
in the interest I feel for you touches me very nearly. I promise you to
keep your secret most scrupulously, if you confide it to me, and I will
do everything in my power to effect what you may wish to have done."

Thanks to this skilful patching up (the phrase will be excused, we
trust), Madame d'Harville regained La Goualeuse's confidence, which had
been for a moment repressed. Fleur-de-Marie, in her candour, reproached
herself for having wrongly interpreted the words which had wounded her.

"Excuse me, madame," she said to Clémence; "I was, no doubt, wrong not
to tell you at once what you desired to know, but you asked me for the
name of my preserver, and, in spite of myself, I could not resist the
pleasure of speaking of him."

"Nothing could be more praiseworthy, and it proves how truly grateful
you are to him. Tell me how it was that you left the worthy people with
whom you were, no doubt, placed by M. Rodolph? Is it to this event that
the oath you were compelled to take, refers?"

"Yes, madame; but, thanks to you, I think I may still keep my word
faithfully, and, at the same time, inform my benefactors as to my
disappearance."

"Now, then, my poor girl, I am all attention to you."

"It is three months nearly since M. Rodolph placed me at a farm, which
is situated four or five leagues from Paris--"

"Did M. Rodolph take you there himself?"

"Yes, madame, and confided me to the charge of a worthy lady, as good as
she was venerable; and I loved her like my mother. She and the curé of
the village, at the request of M. Rodolph, took charge of my education."

"And M.--Rodolph,--did he often come to the farm?"

"No, madame, he only came three times during the whole time I was
there."

Clémence's heart throbbed with joy.

"And when he came to see you that made you very happy, did it not?"

"Oh, yes, madame! It was more than happiness to me; it was a feeling
mingled with gratitude, respect, adoration, and even a degree of fear."

"Of fear?"

"Between him and me, between him and others, the distance is so great!"

"But what, then, was his rank?"

"I do not know that he had any rank, madame."

"Yet you allude to the distance which exists between him and others."

"Oh, madame, what places him above all the rest of the world is the
elevation of his character, his inexhaustible generosity towards those
who suffer, the enthusiasm which he inspires in every one. The wicked,
even, cannot hear his name without trembling, and respect as much as
they dread him! But forgive me, madame, for still speaking of him. I
ought to be silent, for I seek to give you an adequate idea of him who
ought to be adored in silence. I might as well try to express by words
the goodness of Heaven!"

"This comparison--"

"Is, perhaps, sacrilegious, madame; but will it offend the good God to
compare to him one who has given me the consciousness of good and evil,
one who has snatched me from the abyss, one, in fact, to whom I owe a
new existence?"

"I do not blame you, my child; I can understand all your noble
exaggerations. But how was it that you abandoned this farm, where you
must have been so happy?"

"Alas, not voluntarily, madame!"

"Who, then, forced you away?"

"One evening, some days since," said Fleur-de-Marie, trembling even as
she spoke, "I was going towards the parsonage-house in the village, when
a wicked woman, who had used me very cruelly during my infancy, and a
man, her accomplice, who had concealed themselves in a ravine, threw
themselves upon me, and, after having gagged me, carried me off in a
hackney-coach."

"For what purpose?"

"I know not, madame. My ravishers, as I think, were acting in conformity
to orders from some powerful personages."

"What followed this?"

"Scarcely was the hackney-coach in motion, than the wicked creature, who
is called La Chouette, exclaimed, 'I have some vitriol here, and I'll
rub La Goualeuse's face, to disfigure her with it!'"

"Oh, horrible! Unhappy girl! And who has saved you from this danger?"

"The woman's confederate, a blind man called the Schoolmaster."

"And he defended you?"

"Yes, madame, this and another time also. On this occasion there was a
struggle between him and La Chouette: exerting his strength, the
Schoolmaster compelled her to throw out of window the bottle which held
the vitriol. This was the first service he rendered me, after having,
however, aided in carrying me off. The night was excessively dark. At
the end of an hour and a half the coach stopped, as I think, on the
highroad which traverses the Plain St. Denis, and here was a man on
horseback, evidently awaiting us. 'What!' said he, 'have you got her at
last?' 'Yes, we've got her,' answered La Chouette, who was furious
because she had been hindered from disfiguring me. 'If you wish to get
rid of the little baggage at once, it will be a good plan to stretch her
on the ground, and let the coach wheels pass over her skull. It will
appear as if she had been accidentally killed.'"

"You make me shudder."

"Alas, madame, La Chouette was quite capable of doing what she said!
Fortunately, the man on horseback replied that he would not have any
harm done to me, and all he wanted was to have me confined somewhere for
two months in a place whence I could neither go out nor be allowed to
write to any one. Then La Chouette proposed to take me to a man's called
Bras Rouge, who keeps a tavern in the Champs Elysées. In this tavern
there are several subterranean chambers, and one of these, La Chouette
said, would serve me for a prison. The man on horseback agreed to this
proposition; and he promised me that, after remaining two months at Bras
Rouge's, I should be properly taken care of, and not be sorry for having
quitted the farm at Bouqueval."

"What a strange mystery!"

"This man gave money to La Chouette, and promised her more when she
should bring me from Bras Rouge's, and then galloped away. Our
hackney-coach continued its way on to Paris; and a short time before we
reached the barrier the Schoolmaster said to La Chouette, 'You want to
shut Goualeuse up in one of Bras Rouge's cellars, when you know very
well that, being so close to the river's side, these cellars are always
under water in the winter! Do you wish to drown her?' 'Yes,' replied La
Chouette."

"Poor girl! What had you ever done to this horrid woman?"

"Nothing, madame; and from my very infancy she had always been so full
of hatred towards me. The Schoolmaster replied, 'I won't have Goualeuse
drowned! She sha'n't go to Bras Rouge's!' La Chouette was as astonished
as I was, madame, to hear this man defend me thus, and she flew into a
violent rage, and swore she would take me to Bras Rouge's in spite of
the Schoolmaster. 'I defy you!' said he, 'for I have got Goualeuse by
the arm, and I will not let go my hold of her; and, if you come near
her, I'll strangle you!' 'What do you mean, then, to do with her,' cried
La Chouette, 'since she must be concealed somewhere for two months, so
that no one may know where she is?' 'There's a way,' said the
Schoolmaster. 'We are going by the Champs Elysées; we will stop the
coach a little way off the guard-house, and you shall go to Bras Rouge's
tavern. It is midnight, and you will be sure to find him; bring him
here, and he shall lead La Goualeuse to the guard-house, declaring that
she is a _fille de la Cité_, whom he has found loitering about his
house. As girls are sentenced to three months' imprisonment if found in
the Champs Elysées, and as La Goualeuse is still on the police books,
she will be apprehended and sent to St. Lazare, where she will be better
taken care of and concealed than in Bras Rouge's cellar.' 'But,'
answered La Chouette, 'Goualeuse will not allow herself to be arrested
even at the _corps-de-garde_. She will declare that we have carried her
off, and give information against us; and, supposing even that she goes
to prison, she will write to her protectors, and all will be
discovered.' 'No, she will go to prison willingly,' answered the
Schoolmaster; 'and she shall take an oath not to give any information
against any person as long as she is in St. Lazare, nor afterwards,
either. This is a debt she owes me, for I prevented you from disfiguring
her, La Chouette, and saved her from being drowned at Bras Rouge's; but
if, after having sworn not to speak, she dares to do so, we will attack
the farm at Bouqueval with fire and blood!' Then, addressing me, the
Schoolmaster added,'Decide, then: take the oath I demand of you, and you
shall get off for three months in prison; if not, I abandon you to La
Chouette, who will take you to Bras Rouge's, where you will be drowned,
and we will set Bouqueval farm on fire. So, come, decide. I know, if you
take the oath, you will keep it.'"

"And you did swear?"

"Alas, yes, madame! I was so fearful they would do my protectors at the
farm an injury, and then I so much dreaded being drowned by La Chouette
in a cellar, it seemed so frightful to me; another death would have
seemed to me less horrid, and, perhaps, I should not have tried to
escape it."

"What a dreadful idea at your age!" said Madame d'Harville, looking at
La Goualeuse with surprise. "When you have left this place, and have
been restored to your benefactors, shall you not be very happy? Has not
your repentance effaced the past?"

"Can the past ever be effaced? Can the past ever be forgotten? Can
repentance kill memory, madame?" exclaimed Fleur-de-Marie, in a tone so
despairing that Clémence shuddered.

"But all faults are retrieved, unhappy girl!"

"And the remembrance of stain, madame, does not that become more and
more terrible in proportion as the soul becomes purer, in proportion as
the mind becomes more elevated? Alas, the higher we ascend, the deeper
appears the abyss which we have quitted!"

"Then you renounce all hope of restoration--of pardon?"

"On the part of others--no, madame, your kindness proves to me that
remorse will find indulgence."

"But you will be pitiless towards yourself?"

"Others, madame, may not know, pardon, or forget what I have been, but I
shall never forget it!"

"And do you sometimes desire to die?"

"Sometimes!" said Goualeuse, smiling bitterly. Then, after a moment's
silence, she added, "Sometimes,--yes, madame."

"Still you were afraid of being disfigured by that horrid woman; and so
you wish to preserve your beauty, my poor little girl. That proves that
life has still some attraction for you; so courage! Courage!"

"It is, perhaps, weakness to think of it, but if I were handsome, as you
say, madame, I should like to die handsome, pronouncing the name of my
benefactor."

Madame d'Harville's eyes filled with tears. Fleur-de-Marie had said
these last words with so much simplicity; her angelic, pale, depressed
features, her melancholy smile, were all so much in accord with her
words, that it was impossible to doubt the reality of her sad desire.
Madame d'Harville was endued with too much delicacy not to feel how
miserable, how fatal, was this thought of La Goualeuse: "I shall never
forget what I have been!"--the fixed, permanent, incessant idea which
controlled and tortured Fleur-de-Marie's life. Clémence, ashamed at
having for an instant misconstrued the ever disinterested generosity of
the prince, regretted also that she had for a moment allowed herself to
be actuated by any feeling of absurd jealousy against La Goualeuse,
who, with such pure excitement, expressed her gratitude towards her
protector. It was strange that the admiration which this poor prisoner
felt so deeply towards Rodolph perhaps increased the profound love which
Clémence must for ever conceal from him. She said, to drive away these
thoughts:

"I trust that, for the future, you will be less severe towards yourself.
But let us talk of this oath, for now I can explain your silence. You
will not denounce these wretches?"

"Although the Schoolmaster shared in my carrying off, yet he twice
defended me, and I would not be ungrateful towards him."

"Then you lent yourself to the plans of these monsters?"

"Yes, madame, I was so frightened! The Chouette went to seek for Bras
Rouge, who conducted me to the guard-house, saying he had found me
roving near his cabaret. I did not deny it, and so they took me into
custody and brought me here."

"But your friends at the farm must be in the utmost anxiety about you!"

"Alas, madame, in my great alarm, I did not reflect that my oath would
prevent me from assuring them of my safety. Now that makes me wretched!
But I think (and hope you think so, too) that, without breaking my word,
I may beg of you to write to Madame Georges at the farm of Bouqueval,
and assure her that she need have no fears for me, without informing her
where I am; for I have promised to be silent."

"My child, these precautions will be useless if, at my recommendation,
you are pardoned. To-morrow you will return to the farm without having
betrayed your oath by that; and you may consult your friends hereafter
to know how far you are bound by a promise which was extorted from you
by a threat."

"You believe then, madame, that, thanks to your kindness, I may hope to
leave here very soon?"

"You deserve my interest so much that I am sure I shall succeed, and I
have no doubt but that the day after to-morrow you may rely on going in
person to your benefactors."

"So soon! Madame, how have I deserved so much goodness on your part? How
can I ever repay your kindness?"

"By continuing to behave as you have done. I only regret that I cannot
do anything towards your future existence; that is a pleasure which your
friends have reserved for themselves."

At this moment Madame Armand entered abruptly, and with a troubled air.

"Madame la Marquise," she said, addressing Clémence with hesitation, "I
am deeply pained with a message I have to convey to you."

"What do you mean, madame?"

"The Duke de Lucenay is below, just come from your house, madame."

"La, how you frighten me! What's the matter?"

"I do not know, madame; but M. de Lucenay has, he told me, some very
distressing information to communicate to you. He learnt from the
duchess, his lady, that you were here, and has come in great haste."

"Distressing information!" said Madame d'Harville to herself; then she
suddenly shrieked out, in agonised accents, "My daughter, my daughter,
my daughter, perhaps! Oh, speak, madame!"

"I do not know, your ladyship."

"Oh, for mercy's sake--for mercy's sake, take me to M. de Lucenay!"
cried Madame d'Harville, rushing out with a bewildered air, followed by
Madame Armand.

"Poor mother! She fears for her child!" said La Goualeuse, following
Clémence with her eyes. "Oh, no, it is impossible! At the very moment
when she was so benevolent and kind to me such a blow could not strike
her! No, no; once again I say it is impossible!"




CHAPTER XIII.

THE FORCED FRIENDSHIP.


We shall now conduct the reader to the house in the Rue du Temple, about
three o'clock on the day in which M. d'Harville terminated his
existence. At the time mentioned, the conscientious and indefatigable M.
Pipelet sat alone in his lodge, occupied in repairing the boot which
had, more than once, fallen from his hand during Cabrion's last attack;
the physiognomy of the delicate-minded porter was dejected, and
exhibited a more than usually melancholy air.

All at once a loud and shrill voice was heard calling from the upper
part of the house, exclaiming, in tones which reëchoed down the
staircase:

"M. Pipelet! M. Pipelet! Make haste! Come up as fast as you can! Madame
Pipelet is taken very ill!"

"God bless me!" cried Alfred, rising from his stool. "Anastasie ill!"
But, quickly resuming his seat, he said to himself, "What a simpleton I
must be to believe such a thing! My wife has been gone out more than an
hour! Ah, but may she not have returned without my observing it?
Certainly, such a mode of proceeding would be somewhat irregular, but I
am not the less bound to admit that it is possible."

"M. Pipelet!" called out the up-stairs voice again. "Pray come as
quickly as you can; I am holding your wife in my arms!"

"Holloa!" said Pipelet, springing up abruptly. "Somebody got my wife in
his arms!"

"I really cannot manage to unlace Madame Pipelet's stays by myself!"
screamed out the voice, in tones louder than before.

These words perfectly electrified Alfred, and the blush of offended
modesty empurpled his melancholy features.

"Sir-r-r!" cried he in a stentorian voice, as he rushed frantically from
his lodge. "Sir-r-r! I adjure you, in the name of Honour, to leave my
wife and her stays alone! I come! I come!"

And so saying, Alfred dashed into the dark labyrinth called a staircase,
forgetting, in his excitement, to close the door of the lodge after him.

Scarcely had he quitted it than an individual entered quickly, snatched
from the table the cobbler's hammer, sprung on the bed, and, by means of
four small tacks, previously inserted into each corner of a thick
cardboard he carried with him, nailed the cardboard to the back of the
dark recess in which stood Pipelet's bed; then disappeared as quickly as
he had come. So expeditiously was the operation performed, that the
porter, having almost immediately recollected his omission respecting
the closing the lodge door, hastily descended, and both shut and locked
it; then putting the key in his pocket, returned with all speed to
succour his wife above-stairs, without the slightest suspicion crossing
his mind that any foot had trod there since his own. Having taken this
precautionary measure, Alfred again darted off to the assistance of
Anastasie, exclaiming, with all the power of his lungs:

"Sir-r-r! I come! Behold me! I place my wife beneath the safeguard of
your delicacy!"

But a fresh surprise awaited the worthy porter, and had well-nigh caused
him to fall from the height he had ascended to the sill of his own
lodge,--the voice of her he expected to find fainting in the arms of
some unknown individual was now heard, not from the upper part of the
house, but at the entrance! In well-known accents, but sharper and
shriller than usual, he heard Anastasie exclaim:

"Why, Alfred! What do you mean by leaving the lodge? Where have you got
to, you old gossip?"

At this appeal, M. Pipelet managed to descend as far as the first
landing, where he remained petrified with astonishment, gazing downwards
with fixed stare, open mouth, and one foot drawn up in the most
ludicrous manner.

"Alfred, I say!" screamed Madame Pipelet, a second time, in a voice loud
enough to awake the dead.

"Anastasie down there? Then it is impossible she can be ill up-stairs,"
said Pipelet, mentally, faithful to his system of close and logical
argumentation. "Whose, then, was the manly voice that spoke of her
illness, and of his undoing her stays? An impostor, doubtless, to whom
my distraction and alarm have been a matter of amusement; but what
motive could he have had in thus working upon my susceptible feelings?
Something very extraordinary is going on here. However, as soon as I
have been to answer my wife's inquiry, I will return to clear up this
mystery, and to discover the person whose voice summoned me in such
haste."

In considerable agitation did M. Pipelet descend, and find himself in
his wife's presence.

"It is you, then, this time?" inquired he.

"Of course it is me; who did you expect it was?"

"'Tis you, indeed! My senses do not deceive me!"

"Alfred, what is the matter with you? Why do you stand there, staring
and opening your mouth, as if you meant to swallow me?"

"Because your presence reveals to me that strange things are passing
here, so strange that--"

"Oh, stuff and nonsense! Give me the key of the lodge! What made you
leave it when I was out? I have just come from the office where the
diligence starts from for Normandy. I went there in a coach to take M.
Bradamanti's trunk, as he did not wish that little rascal, Tortillard,
to know anything about it, since, it seems, he had rather no one should
be acquainted with the fact of his leaving Paris this evening; and, as
for his mistrusting the boy, why, I don't wonder at it."

Saying these words, Madame Pipelet took the key from her husband's hand,
opened the lodge, and entered it before her partner; but scarcely were
they both safe within its dark recesses, than an individual, lightly
descending the staircase, passed swiftly and unobserved before the
lodge. This personage was Cabrion, who, having managed to steal
up-stairs, had so powerfully worked upon the porter's tender
susceptibilities. M. Pipelet threw himself into his chair, saying to his
wife, in a voice of deep emotion:

"Anastasie; I do not feel myself comfortable to-day; strange and
mysterious things are going on in this house."

"What! Are you going to break out again? What an old fool you are! Why,
strange things happen in every house. What has come over you? Come,
let's look at you! Well, I declare, you are all of a sweat, just as if
you had been dragged out of the water! What have you been doing since I
left you? Overexerting yourself, I am sure, and I forbid you ever doing
so. La! Look how the great drops pour from him, poor old chick!"

"And well they may!" exclaimed M. Pipelet, passing his hand over his
face, bathed in its own dew; "well may I sweat,--ay, even blood and
water,--for there are facts connected with this house past belief or
comprehension. First, you summon me up-stairs, and, at the same moment,
I find you waiting below! Oh, it is too, too much for my poor brain!"

"Deuce take me, if I can comprehend one word of all you are saying!
Lord, help us! It is to be hoped your poor old brain is not cracked. I
tell you what, if you go on so, I shall just set you down for cracked;
and all through that scamp of a Cabrion,--the devil take him! Ever since
that last trick he played the other day, I declare you have not been
yourself, so flustered and bewildered! Do you mean to live in fear and
dread of that abominable painter all your days?"

But scarcely had Anastasie uttered these words than a fearful thing
occurred. Alfred continued sitting, with his face turned towards the
bed, while the lodge was dimly illumined by the faint glimmer of a
winter's afternoon and a lamp that stood burning on the table, near
Alfred's work. By these doubtful lights, M. Pipelet, just as his wife
pronounced the name of Cabrion, imagined he saw, in the shadow of the
recess, the half stolid, half chuckling features of his enemy. Alas! Too
truly, there he was. His steeple-crowned hat, his flowing locks, thin
countenance, sardonic smile, pointed beard, and look of fiendish malice,
all were there, past all mistake. For a moment, M. Pipelet believed
himself under the influence of a dream, and passed his hand across his
eyes, in hopes that the illusion might disperse; but no; there was
nothing illusive in what his eyes glared so fearfully upon,--nothing
could be more real or positive. Yet, horror of horrors! This object
seemed merely to possess a head, which, without allowing any part of the
body to appear, grinned a satanic smile from the dark draperies of the
recess in which stood the bed. At this horrific vision M. Pipelet fell
back, without uttering a word. With uplifted arm he pointed towards the
source of his terrors, but with so strong a manifestation of intense
alarm that Madame Pipelet, spite of her usual courage and
self-possession, could not help feeling a dread of--she knew not what.
She staggered back a few steps, then, seizing Alfred by the hand,
exclaimed:

"Cabrion!"

"I know it!" groaned forth M. Pipelet, in a deep, hollow voice, shutting
his eyes to exclude the frightful spectre.

Nothing could have borne more flattering tribute to the talent which had
so admirably delineated the features of Cabrion than the overwhelming
terror his pasteboard likeness occasioned to the worthy couple in the
lodge; but the first surprise of Anastasie over, she, bold as a lioness,
rushed to the bed, sprang upon it, and, though not without some
trepidation, tore the painting from the wall, against which it had been
nailed; then, crowning her valiant deed by her accustomed favourite
expression, the amazon triumphantly exclaimed:

"Get along with you!"

Alfred, on the contrary, remained with closed eyes and extended hands,
fixed and motionless, according to his wont during the most critical
passages of his life; the continued oscillation of his bell-crowned hat
alone revealing, from time to time, the violence of his internal
emotions.

"Open your eyes, my old duck!" cried Madame Pipelet, triumphantly. "It
is nothing to be afraid of, only a picture, a portrait of that scoundrel
Cabrion. Look here, lovey,--look at 'Stasie stamping on it!" continued
the indignant wife, throwing the painting on the ground, and jumping
upon it with all her force; then added, "Ah, I wish I had the villain
here, to serve the same! I'll warrant I'd mark him for life!" Then,
picking up the portrait, she said, "Well, I've served you out, anyhow!
Just look, old dear, if I haven't!"

But poor Alfred, with a disconsolate shake of the head, made signs that
he had rather not, and further intimating, by expressive gestures, his
earnest desire that his wife would remove the detested likeness of his
bitter foe far from his view.

"Well," cried the porteress, examining the portrait by the aid of the
lamp, "was there ever such imperance? Why, Alfred, the vile feller has
presumed to write in red letters at the bottom of the picture, 'To my
dear friend Pipelet; presented by his friend for life, Cabrion!'"

"For life!" groaned Pipelet; then, heaving a deep sigh, he added, "Yes,
'tis my life he aims at; and he will finish by taking it. I shall exist,
from this day forward, in a state of continual alarm, believing that the
fiend who torments me is ever near,--hid, perhaps, in the floor, the
wall, the ceiling, and thence watches me throughout the day; or even at
night, when sleeping in the chaste arms of my wife, his eye is still on
me. And who can tell but he is at this very instant behind me, gazing
with that well-known sardonic grin; or crouched down in some corner of
the room, like a deadly reptile! Say, you monster, are you there? Are
you there, I demand?" cried M. Pipelet, accompanying this furious
adjuration by a sort of circular motion of the head, as though wishing
to interrogate every nook and corner of the lodge.

"Yes, dear friend, here I am!" answered the well-known voice of Cabrion,
in blandly affectionate tones.

By a simple trick in ventriloquism, these words were made to appear as
though issuing from the recess in which stood the bed; but the malicious
joker was in reality close to the door of the lodge, enjoying every
particular look and word that passed within. However, after uttering the
last few words, he prudently disappeared with all haste, though not (as
will be seen) without leaving his victim a fresh subject for rage,
astonishment, and meditation.

Madame Pipelet, still skeptical and courageous, carefully examined under
the bed, as well as in every corner of the lodge, but, discovering no
trace of the enemy, actually went out into the alley to prosecute her
researches; while M. Pipelet, completely crushed by this last blow,
fell back into his chair in a state of boundless despair.

"Never mind, Alfred!" said Anastasie, who always exhibited great
determination upon all critical occasions. "Bless you! The villain had
managed to hide himself somewhere near the door, and, while we were
looking in one direction, he managed to slip out in another. But just
wait a bit: I shall catch him one of these days, and then see if I don't
make him taste my broomstick! Let him take care, that's all!"

The door opened as she concluded this animating address, and Madame
Séraphin, the housekeeper of the notary, Jacques Ferrand, entered the
lodge.

"Good day, Madame Séraphin," said Madame Pipelet, who, in her extreme
anxiety to conceal her domestic troubles from a stranger, assumed all at
once a most gracious and winning manner; "what can I have the pleasure
of doing for you?"

"Why, first of all, tell me what is the meaning of your new sign?"

"Our new sign?"

"Yes; the small printed board."

"Printed board!"

"To be sure; that black board with red letters, hung over the door
leading from the alley up to your lodge."

"What, out in the street?"

"In the street, I tell you, precisely over your door."

"I wish I may die if I understand a single word of what you are talking
about! Do you, old dear?"

Alfred spoke not.

"Certainly," continued Madame Séraphin, "since it relates to M. Pipelet,
he can best explain to me what this board means."

Alfred uttered a sort of heavy, inarticulate groan, while his
bell-crowned hat recommenced its convulsive agitations. This pantomimic
action was meant to express that Alfred was in no condition to explain
anything to anybody, having his mind already sufficiently burdened with
an infinity of problematical questions he sought in vain to solve.

"Don't take any notice of poor dear Alfred, Madame Séraphin; he has got
the cramp in his stomach, and that makes him so very--But what is this
board of which you were speaking? Very likely it has just been put up by
the man who keeps the wine-shop at the corner."

"I tell you again it is no such thing. It is a small painted board, hung
up over your door,--I mean the door leading from the alley to the
street."

"Ah, you are laughing at us!"

"Indeed I am not. I saw it just now, as I came in; on it is written, in
large letters, 'Pipelet and Cabrion, dealers in Friendship and similar
Articles. Inquire of the Porter.'"

"Gracious goodness! Do you hear that, Alfred? Do you hear what is
written up over our door?"

Alfred gazed at Madame Séraphin with a bewildered look, but he neither
understood nor sought to understand her meaning.

"Do you mean to say," continued Madame Pipelet, confounded by this fresh
audacity, "that you positively saw a little board out in the street with
all that about Alfred and Cabrion, and dealing in friendship?"

"I tell you I have just seen it, and read with my own eyes what I
described to you. 'Well,' said I to myself, 'this is droll enough! M.
Pipelet is a shoemaker by trade, but here he writes up publicly that he
is a dealer in friendship along with a M. Cabrion! What can all this
mean? There is something meant more than meets the eye!' Still, as the
board further directed all persons desirous of knowing more to apply to
the porter, 'Oh,' thinks I, 'Madame Pipelet can explain all this to me!'
But, look, look!" cried Madame Séraphin, suddenly breaking off in her
remarks. "Your husband is taken ill! Mind what you are about, or he will
fall backwards!"

Madame Pipelet flew to her afflicted partner, and was just in time to
receive him, half fainting, in her arms. The last blow had been too
overwhelming,--the man in the bell-crowned hat had but just strength
left to murmur forth, "The scoundrel has, then, publicly placarded me!"

"I told you, Madame Séraphin, that poor Alfred was suffering dreadful
with the cramp in his stomach, besides being worried to death by a
crack-brained vagabond, who is at him night and day: he'll be the death
of my poor old duck at last. Never mind, darling, I've got a nice little
drop of aniseed to give you; so drink it, and see if you can't shake
your old feathers and be yourself again!"

Thanks to the timely application of Madame Pipelet's infallible remedy,
Alfred gradually recovered his senses; but, alas, scarcely was he
restored to full consciousness ere he was subjected to another and
equally cruel trial of his feelings!

An individual of middle age, respectably dressed, and possessing a
countenance so simple, or rather so silly, as to render it impossible to
suspect him of any malice prepense or intended irony, opened the upper
and glazed part of the lodge door, saying, with the most genuine air of
mystification:

"I have just read on a small board placed over the door, at the entrance
to the alley, the following words: 'Pipelet and Cabrion, dealers in
Friendship and similar Articles. Inquire of the Porter.' Will you oblige
me by explaining the meaning of those words, if you are, as I presume
you to be, the porter in question?"

"The meaning!" exclaimed M. Pipelet, in a voice of thunder, and giving
vent at length to his so long restrained indignation; "the meaning is
simply, sir-r-r, that M. Cabrion is an infamous scoundrel,--an
impostor!"

The simple-looking interrogator drew back, in dread of the consequences
that might follow this sudden and furious burst of wrath, while, wrought
up to a state of fury, Alfred leaned over the half door of the lodge,
his glaring eyeballs and clenched hands indicating the intensity of his
feelings; while the figures of Madame Séraphin and Anastasie were dimly
revealed amid the murky shades of the small room.

"Let me tell you, sir-r-r!" cried M. Pipelet, addressing the
placid-looking man at the door, "that I have no dealings with that
beggar Cabrion, and certainly none in the way of friendship!"

"No, that I'm sure you have not!" screamed out Madame Pipelet, in
confirmation of her husband's words; adding, as she displayed her
forbidding countenance over her husband's shoulder, "and I wonder very
much where that old dunderhead has come from to ask such a stupid
question?"

"I beg your pardon, madame," said the guileless-looking individual thus
addressed, again withdrawing another step to escape the concentrated
anger of the enraged pair; "placards are made to be read,--you put out a
board, which I read,--now allow me to say that I am not to blame for
perusing what you set up purposely to attract attention, but that you
are decidedly wrong to insult me so grossly when I civilly come to you,
as your own board desires, for information."

"Oh, you old fool! Get along with you!" exclaimed Anastasie, with a most
hideous distortion of visage.

"You are a rude, unmannerly woman!"

"Alfred, deary, just fetch me your boot-jack: I'll give that old
chatterer such a mark that his own mother shall not know her darling
again!"

"Really, madame, I can't say I understand receiving such rough treatment
when I come, by your own directions, to make inquiries respecting what
you or your husband have publicly notified in the streets."

"But, sir-r-r--!" cried the unhappy porter.

"Sir!" interrupted the hitherto placid inquirer, now worked up into
extreme rage, "Sir! You may carry your friendship with your M. Cabrion
as far as you please, but, give me leave to tell you, you have no
business to parade yourself or your friendships in the face of everybody
in the streets. And I think it right, sir, to let you know a bit of my
mind; which is, that you are a boasting braggart, and that I shall go at
once and lay a formal complaint against you at the police office."
Saying which, the individual departed in an apparently towering passion.

"Anastasie," moaned out poor Pipelet, in a dolorous voice, "I shall
never survive all this! I feel but too surely that I am struck with
death,--I have not a hope of escape! You hear my name is publicly
exposed in the open streets, in company with that scoundrel's! He has
dared to placard the hideous tale of my having entered into a treaty of
friendship with him! And the innocent, unsuspecting public will read the
hateful statement--remember it--repeat it--spread the detestable report!
Oh, monstrous, enormous, devilish invention! None but a fiend could have
had such a thought. But there must be an end to this. The measure is
full,--ay, to overflowing; and things have come to such a pass that
either this accursed painter or myself must perish in the deadly
struggle!" And, wrought up to such a state of vigorous resolution as to
completely conquer his usual apathy, M. Pipelet seized the portrait of
Cabrion and rushed towards the door.

"Where are you going, Alfred?" screamed the wife.

"To the commissary of police, and, at the same time, to tear down that
vile board! Then, bearing the board in one hand and the portrait in the
other, I will cry aloud to the commissary, 'Defend, avenge an injured
man! Deliver me from Cabrion!'"

"So do, old darling! There, hold up your head and pluck up courage! And
I tell you what, if the board is too high for you to reach, ask the man
at the wine-shop to lend you his small ladder. That blackguard of a
Cabrion! I only wish I had him in my power, I'd fry him for half an hour
in my largest stew-pan! Why, scores of people have been publicly
executed who did not deserve death a quarter as much as he does! The
villain! I should like to see him just ready to have the guillotine
dropped upon his head. Wouldn't I give him my blessing in a friendly
way? A rascal!"

Alfred, amid all his woes, yet displayed a rare magnanimity, contrasting
strongly with the vindictive spirit of his partner.

"No, no," said he; "spite of the wrongs he has done me, I would not,
even if his life were in my power, 'demand his head!'"

"But I would! I would! I would!" vociferated the ferocious Anastasie.
"If he had fifty heads, I would demand every one of them! I would not
leave him one! But go along; make haste, Alfred, and set the commissary
of police to work upon him."

"No," cried Alfred, "I desire not his blood; but I have a right to
demand the perpetual imprisonment of this malicious being. My repose
requires it,--my health peremptorily calls for it. The laws of my
country must either grant me this reparation for all I have suffered, or
I quit France. Yes, beautiful and beloved France! I turn my back on you
for ever! And that is all an ungrateful nation would gain by neglecting
to heal the wounds of my tortured mind;" and, bending beneath the weight
of his grief, Alfred majestically quitted the lodge, like one of the
ancient victims of all-conquering Fatality.




CHAPTER XIV.

CECILY.


Before we introduce the reader to the conversation between Madame
Séraphin and Madame Pipelet, we must premise that Anastasie, without
entertaining the very slightest suspicion of the virtue and piety of the
notary, felt the greatest indignation at the severity manifested by him
in the case both of Louise Morel and M. Germain; and, as a natural
consequence, the angry porteress included Madame Séraphin in the same
censure; but still, like a skilful politician, Madame Pipelet, for
reasons we shall hereafter explain, concealed her dislike to the
_femme-de-charge_ under the appearance of the greatest cordiality. After
having explicitly declared her extreme disapprobation of the conduct
pursued by Cabrion, Madame Séraphin went on to say:

"By the way, what has become of M. Bradamanti Polidori? I wrote to him
yesterday evening, but got no reply; this morning I came to see him, but
he was not to be found. I trust I shall be more fortunate this time."

Madame Pipelet affected the most lively regret.

"Really," cried she, "you are doomed to be unlucky!"

"How so?"

"M. Bradamanti has not yet returned."

"Upon my word, this is enough to tire a saint!"

"So it is, I declare, Madame Séraphin. I'm sure I'm as sorry about it as
if it was my own self."

"I had so much to say to him."

"It is all for the world as though you were bewitched!"

"Why, yes, it is so much the more vexatious, because I have to find all
manner of excuses to run down here; for, if once M. Ferrand were to find
out that I came to consult a quack doctor, he who is so devout, so
scrupulous in all things, we should have a fearful scene!"

"La! He is just like Alfred, who is so silly that really he is afraid of
everything and everybody!"

"And you do not know, I suppose, when M. Bradamanti will return home?"

"No, not precisely; but I know very well that he expects some one about
six or seven o'clock this evening, for he told me to request the person
to call again, should he not be at home at the time mentioned. So, if
you will call again in the evening, you will be sure to see him."

But, as Anastasie said these words, she mentally added, "I would not
have you too sure of that; in an hour's time he will be on his road to
Normandy!"

"Very well, then," said Madame Séraphin, with an air of considerable
chagrin. Then, pausing a brief space, she added, "I had also something
to say to you, my dear Madame Pipelet. You know, I suppose, what
happened to that girl, Louise Morel, whom everybody thought so good and
virtuous--"

"Oh, pray don't mention her!" replied Madame Pipelet, rolling her eyes
with affected horror. "It makes one's hair stand on end."

"I merely alluded to her by way of saying that we are now quite without
a servant, and that, if you should chance to hear of a well-disposed,
honest, and industrious young person, I should take it as a favour if
you would send her to us. Upon my word, girls of good character are so
difficult to be met with that one had need search in twenty places at
once to find one."

"Depend upon it, Madame Séraphin, that, should I hear of anybody likely
to suit you, I will let you know; but, in my opinion, good situations
are more rare even than good servants." Then, again relapsing into a fit
of abstraction, Anastasie added, though mentally, "A likely story that I
should send any young girl to be starved to death in your dungeon of a
house; your master is too stingy and hard-hearted! The idea of throwing
that poor Louise and M. Germain both in prison!"

"I need not tell you," continued Madame Séraphin, "what a still, quiet
house ours is; any young person must be improved by living in a family
where there is continually something to be learned; and that Louise must
have been naturally a depraved creature, to turn out badly spite of the
good and religious advice bestowed on her by M. Ferrand."

"No doubt; but depend upon it that, directly I hear of a young person
likely to suit you, I will be sure to let you know."

"There is just one thing more I should like to mention," resumed Madame
Séraphin, "and that is, that M. Ferrand would greatly prefer taking a
person who had no relatives or friends, because then, you understand,
having no motive for wishing to go out, she would be less exposed to
danger, neither would her mind be so likely to be upset; so that, if you
should happen to meet with an orphan, I think M. Ferrand would prefer
taking her, in the first place, because it would be doing a good action;
and, secondly, as, having neither friends nor followers, she could not
have any excuse for wishing to go out. I assure you that wretched girl,
Louise, gave M. Ferrand a severe lesson, I can tell you, Madame Pipelet,
and one that will make him very careful what sort of a servant he
engages. Only imagine such a scandalous affair occurring in a house like
ours! Dreadful! Well, then, I will call again this evening to see M.
Bradamanti, and, at the same time, I can have a little conversation with
Mother Burette."

"Then I will say adieu, Madame Séraphin, till this evening, when you
will be quite sure of finding M. Bradamanti."

Madame Séraphin returned the salutation, and quitted the lodge.

"What a deuce of a worry she is in about Bradamanti!" said Madame
Pipelet, when her visitor had disappeared. "I wonder what she wants with
him? And then, too, M. Bradamanti is just as anxious to avoid seeing her
before he starts for Normandy. I was dreadfully afraid she meant to
stick here till he did return home, and that would have been the more
awkward, as M. Bradamanti expects the same lady who came last night; I
could not manage to have a squint at her then, but I am determined
to-night to stare her regularly out of countenance, like I did the lady
who came on the sly to visit my five-farthing commandant. Ah, the screw!
the nipcheese! He has never ventured to show his face here since.
However, by way of teaching him better, I shall make good use of his
wood; yes, yes, my fine gentleman, it shall keep the lodge warm, as well
as air your shut-up apartments. A disappointed puppy! Ha, ha, ha! Go,
and be hanged with your paltry twelve francs a month! Better learn to
pay people honest wages, than go flaunting about in a bright green
dressing-gown, like a great lanky grasshopper! But who the plague can
this lady of M. Bradamanti's be, I wonder? Is she respectable, or
t'other? I should like to know, for I am as curious as a magpie; but
that is not my fault; I am as God made me, so I can't help it. I know
one's disposition is born with us, and so the blame does not lie at my
door. Stop a bit; I've just thought of a capital plan to find out who
this lady really is; and, what's more, I'll engage it turns out
successful. Who is that I see coming? Ah, my king of lodgers! Your
servant, M. Rodolph!" cried Madame Pipelet, saluting him, after the
military fashion, by placing the back of her left hand to her wig.

It was, in truth, Rodolph, who, as yet ignorant of the death of M.
d'Harville, approached gaily, saying:

"Good day to you, Madame Pipelet! Can you tell me if Mlle. Rigolette is
at home? I have something to say to her, if she is."

"At home, poor girl! Why, when is she ever out? When does she lose an
hour, or idle instead of working?"

"And how gets on Morel's unfortunate wife? Does she appear more
reconciled to her misfortunes?"

"Yes, M. Rodolph, I am glad to say she does; and how can she be
otherwise, when, thanks to you, or the generous friend whose agent you
are, she is supplied with every comfort, both for herself and her
children, who are as happy as fishes in the sea? Why, they want for
nothing; they have good air, good food, good fires, and good beds, with
a nurse to take care of them, besides Mlle. Rigolette, who, although
working like a little busy bee, and without seeming to take part in
their proceedings, never loses sight of them, bless you! And they have
had a black doctor to see them, who says he comes from you. 'Well,' says
I, when I looked at him, 'you are a funny one for a doctor, you are! I
suppose, Mr. Nigger, you are physician to a company of charcoalmen,
because there is no fear of your blacking your hands when you feel their
pulse?' But la, M. Rodolph, I'm only joking! For what difference does
colour make? Leastways your blacky seems to be a first-rate clever man,
spite of his dingy face, for the first thing he did was to order a
composing draught for Morel's wife, which did her a world of good!"

"Poor thing! I doubt not she is still very miserable?"

"Why, yes, M. Rodolph, naturally enough she is, for she has plenty of
grief before her: her husband in a madhouse, and her daughter in prison!
Ah, that poor Louise! That is the sorest of her heartaches; such a blow
as that to an honest family, such as theirs has always been, is not to
be got over so easily. And that Madame Séraphin, housekeeper to the
notary, who has caused all this misery, has just been here, saying all
manner of cruel things about the poor girl. If I had not had my own game
to play, she should not have told the tale quite her own way; but I've
got a pill for her to swallow by and by, so I'll let her off easy. Why,
only conceive her assurance in coming to ask me if I could not recommend
her some young person to supply the place of Louise in the establishment
of that old brute of a notary. What a blessed pair the master and his
housekeeper are! Just fancy their preferring an orphan, if they can
obtain one, to be their servant! Don't you see through that, M. Rodolph?
They pretend that their reason for wishing for an orphan is, because,
having neither parents nor friends, she would never wish to go out, and
would be more free from interruption; but that is not it, that is all a
fudge; the truth is, they think that, if they could get a poor,
friendless girl into their clutches, having nobody to see her righted,
they could cheat her out of her wages as much as they liked. Now is not
that true, M. Rodolph?"

"No doubt," replied the person addressed, with the air of one who is
thinking deeply on a subject.

The information thus afforded him as to Madame Séraphin seeking an
orphan girl, to replace Louise as servant in the family of M. Ferrand,
appeared to present the almost certain means of accomplishing the just
punishment of the notary; and, while Madame Pipelet was yet speaking, he
was arranging every point of the part he had mentally destined for
Cecily, whom he purposed making the principal instrument in effecting
the retributive justice he meant to inflict on the vile persecutor of
Louise Morel.

"Oh, I was quite sure you would be of my opinion," continued Madame
Pipelet, "and that you would agree with me in thinking that their only
reason for desiring to engage an orphan girl is, that they may do her
out of her wages; and, I can tell you, I would sooner drop down dead
than send any poor, friendless creature to such a house! Certainly, I
don't happen to know of any one, but, if I knew of fifty, they should
not enter into such a wretched house, if I could hinder them. Don't you
think I'm right, M. Rodolph?"

"Madame Pipelet, will you do me a great favour?"

"Do you a favour, M. Rodolph? Lord love your heart and soul! Just say
what there is I can do for you, and then see whether I will or no. Come,
what is it? Shall I jump into the fire? or curl my best wig with boiling
oil? or is there anybody I can worry, bite, pinch, or scold for you?
Only say the word. I am wholly at your service, heart and body, your
most humble slave; always stipulating that in my service there shall be
no offence to Alfred's prior claims on me."

"Oh, my dear Madame Pipelet, make yourself perfectly easy! I want you to
manage a little affair for me, which is this: I have got to place out a
young orphan girl, who is utterly a stranger to Paris; and I wish very
much, with your assistance, to obtain for her the situation vacant in M.
Ferrand's establishment."

"You don't mean it? La, I never can think you are in earnest! What! Send
a poor, friendless girl to live with such a miserly wretch as that
hard-hearted old notary? No, no, M. Rodolph, that was not what you
wanted me to do, I'm sure!"

"But, indeed, it is; why, a place is a place, and, if the young person I
mentioned to you should not like it, she is not obliged to stay there;
and then, don't you see, she would at once be able to maintain herself,
while I should have no further uneasiness about her?"

"Oh, as far as that goes, M. Rodolph, it is your affair, not mine; and,
whatever happens, remember I warned you. If, after all you have heard,
you still think the place would suit your young friend, why, of course,
you can please yourself; and, then, to be sure, as far as regards the
notary, there are always two sides to every picture, a for and against
to every tale; he is hard-hearted as a flint-stone, obstinate as a
jackass, bigoted as a Jesuit, that's true enough; but then he is of the
most scrupulous punctuality in all his affairs; he gives very low wages,
but, then, he pays on the nail; the living is very bad at his house,
still it is the same one day as another. In a word, though it is a house
where a servant must work like a horse, yet, at the same time, it is one
of those dull, quiet, stupid places, where there is certainly nothing to
tempt a girl to get into mischief. Certainly, Louise managed to go
wrong, but that was all a chance."

"Madame Pipelet, I am going to confide a great secret to your honour."

"Well, then, upon the word and honour of Anastasie Pipelet, whose maiden
name was Gulimard, as true as there is a God and heaven, and that Alfred
always wears green coats, I will be silent as a stockfish!"

"You must not breathe a word to M. Pipelet."

"That I won't, I swear by the head of that dear old duck himself, if it
relates to a proper and correct affair."

"Surely, Madame Pipelet, you have too good an opinion of me to suppose,
for a minute, that I would insult your chaste ears with anything that
was not?"

"Well, then, go it! Let's know all about it, and, I promise you, Alfred
shall never be the wiser, be it what it may. Bless you! he is as easy to
cheat as a child of six years old."

"I rely implicitly on you; therefore listen to my words."

"I will, my king of lodgers; and remember that we are now sworn friends
for life or for death. So go on with your story."

"The young person I spoke to you about has, unfortunately, committed one
serious fault."

"I was sure of it! Why, Lord bless you, if I had not married Alfred when
I was fifteen years of age, I dare say I should have committed, fifties
and hundreds of faults! I? There, just as you see. I was like a barrel
of gunpowder at the very sight or mention of a smart young fellow.
Luckily for me, Pipelet extinguished the warmth of my nature in the
coolness of his own virtue; if he had not, I can't say what might have
happened, for I did dearly love the gay deceivers! I merely mention this
to say that, if the young person has only done wrong once, then there
are great hopes of her."

"I trust, indeed, she will atone for her past misconduct. She was living
in service, in Germany, with a relation of mine, and the partner of her
crime was the son of this relative. Do you understand?"

"Do I? Don't I? Go along with you! I understand as well as though I had
committed the fault myself."

"The angry mistress, upon discovering her servant's guilt, drove her
from her house; but the young man was weak enough to quit his paternal
roof, and to bring the unfortunate girl to Paris."

"Well, la, M. Rodolph! What else could you expect? Why, young people
will be young people. I'm sure I--"

"After this act of folly came stern reflection, rendered still more
severe by the fact of the slender stock of money he possessed being
exhausted. In this dilemma, my young relation applied to me; and I
consented to furnish him with the means of returning home, on condition
of his leaving behind him the companion of his flight, whom I undertook
to place out in some respectable capacity."

"Well, I declare, I could not have done more for a son, if it had
pleased Heaven--and Pipelet--that I should have had one!"

"I am delighted that you approve of my conduct; still, as the young girl
is a stranger, and has no one to give her a recommendation, I fear it
will be rather difficult to get her placed. Now, if you would tell
Madame Séraphin that a relation of yours, living in Germany, has sent
her to you, with a very excellent character, the notary would, possibly,
take her into his service; and I should be doubly delighted. Cecily (for
that is her name), having only once gone astray, would, doubtless, soon
regain the right path in a house as severe and saintly as that of the
notary's; and it is for that reason I am desirous of seeing the poor
girl enter into the service of M. Ferrand; and, of course, if introduced
by so respectable a person as yourself, Madame Pipelet, there would be
no fear of her obtaining the place."

"Oh, M. Rodolph!"

"Yes, indeed, my good madame, I am sure that one word from so justly
esteemed an individual as you--"

"Oh, my king of lodgers!"

"I repeat that, if you would patronise the young girl so far as to
introduce her to Madame Séraphin, I have no fears but that she would be
accepted; whereas, you know, if I were to accompany her to the notary's
house--"

"I see what you mean; to be sure, it would look just as queer as if I
were to introduce a young man. Well, I will do what you wish; it will be
serving old Séraphin out as she deserves. I can tell you I have had a
crow to pluck with her a long time, and this seems a famous way of
serving her out; besides, it's a good lark, any way. So look upon the
thing as done, M. Rodolph. I'll cram the old woman well. I will tell her
that a relation of my own, long established in Germany, has just died,
as well as her husband, leaving a daughter wholly dependent on me."

"Capital! Well, then, without saying anything more to Madame Séraphin,
you shall take Cecily to M. Ferrand. All you will have to say is, that,
not having seen or heard anything of your relation during the last
twenty years, you consider it best to let her speak for herself."

"Ah, but then, if the girl only jabbers German?"

"I assure you she speaks French perfectly well. I will give her proper
instructions, therefore you need do nothing more than strongly recommend
her to Madame Séraphin,--or, stay, upon second thoughts, perhaps you had
better not say any more than you have done on the subject, for fear she
should suspect you want to force the girl upon her. You know that,
frequently, the very asking a thing produces a refusal."

"I should think I did, too! Why, that was the way I got rid of all the
flattering lovers that came about me. If they had never asked me a
favour, I don't know what I might have done."

"It is always the case; therefore say nothing more to Madame Séraphin
than just this, that Cecily is an orphan, and a stranger here, very
young and very pretty, that she will be a heavy burden to you, and that
you are not particularly fond of her, in consequence of having long
since quarrelled with her mother, and, consequently, not retaining a
very great affection for the charge bequeathed to your care."

"What a deep one you are! But never mind, there's a pair of us! I say,
M. Rodolph, is it not odd you and I should understand each other so
well? Ah, we two should have suited one another to a hair! Gracious, M.
Rodolph, when I think what might have happened, if we had chanced to
have met when I was such a tender-hearted, susceptible young creature,
and so fond of handsome young men,--don't you fancy we should have
seemed like made for one another,--eh, M. Rodolph?"

"Hush! Suppose M. Pipelet--"

"I forgot him, poor old duck! His brain is half turned since this last
abominable prank of Cabrion's; but I'll tell you about that another
time. As for your young relation, make yourself quite easy; I will
undertake to play my part so well that old Séraphin shall come to me,
and beg to have her as a servant."

"And if you succeed, Madame Pipelet, I have one hundred francs quite at
your service. I am not rich, but--"

"Are you making fun of me, M. Rodolph, or do you imagine I am doing what
I do for the sake of gain? I declare to God it's out of nothing but pure
friendship! One hundred francs! That's handsome, however!"

"Why, I consider it but an act of justice, as well as gratitude, to
offer you a sum which, if left several months on my hands, the girl must
soon have cost me."

"Ah, well, then, since I can serve you by accepting your hundred francs,
of course I have no further objection, M. Rodolph; but we drew a famous
prize in the lottery when you came into the house, and I don't care who
hears me say it, for I'd as lief cry it on the housetops. You are the
very prince and king of good lodgers! Halloa, there is a hackney-coach!
No doubt, the lady M. Bradamanti expects; I could not manage to see her
well when she came yesterday, but I'll have a precious good stare at her
this time; added to which, I've got a capital plan for finding out her
name. Come, you shall see me go to work; it will be a famous lark for
us!"

"No, I thank you, Madame Pipelet; I have not the slightest curiosity
respecting either the name or features of this lady," returned Rodolph,
withdrawing to the very end of the lodge.

"Where do you wish to go, madame?" cried Anastasie, rushing towards the
female, who was entering.

"I am going to M. Bradamanti's," returned the person addressed, visibly
annoyed at having her progress thus arrested.

"He is not at home."

"You are mistaken."

"Oh, no, I am not!" said the porteress, skilfully contriving so to place
herself as to command a perfect view of the stranger's features. "M.
Bradamanti has gone out, positively, absolutely gone out; that is to
say, he is not at home, except to one lady."

"'Tis I, he expects me; and pray, my good woman, allow me to pass; you
are really troublesome!"

"Your name, madame, if you please? I shall soon see if it is the name of
the person M. Bradamanti desired me to admit. Should yours not be the
right name, you don't go up-stairs, unless you first trample on my
body!"

"Is it possible he could be so imprudent as to tell you my name?" cried
the female, with as much surprise as uneasiness.

"Certainly he did, madame, or how should I know it?"

"How very thoughtless!" murmured the stranger. Then, after a momentary
hesitation, she said, impatiently, in a low voice, and as if fearful of
being overheard, "My name is D'Orbigny."

Rodolph started at the word, as it reached his ear, for it was the name
of Madame d'Harville's mother-in-law. Advancing, therefore, from the
dark corner in which he stood, he managed, by the light of the lamp, to
obtain a clear view of the stranger, in whose features he easily traced
the portrait so skilfully drawn by Clémence of the author of all her
sufferings.

"Madame d'Orbigny!" repeated Madame Pipelet, in a loud tone. "Ah, then
you may go up-stairs; that is the name M. Bradamanti gave me."

Madame d'Harville's mother-in-law waited for no second bidding, but
rapidly passed by the lodge.

"Well done us!" shouted the porteress, with a triumphant air; "I have
caught my fish, done the great lady! Now, then, I know her name,--she is
Madame d'Orbigny. That wasn't a bad scheme of mine, was it, M. Rodolph?
But what the plague is the matter with you? How sad and thoughtful you
have grown all of a minute!"

"This lady has been to see M. Bradamanti before, has she not?"

"Yes, she was here yesterday evening; and, directly she was gone, M.
Bradamanti went out, most probably, to take his place in the diligence
for to-day, because, when he came back, he asked me to take his trunk to
the coach office, as he could not trust that little rascal, Tortillard."

"And do you know where M. Bradamanti is going?"

"To Normandy, by way of Alençon."

Rodolph called to his remembrance that Aubiers, the seat of M.
d'Orbigny, was situated in Normandy. There was no longer a doubt that
the charlatan was proceeding to the paternal home of Clémence, and, as a
matter of course, to aid and assist in some scheme of wickedness.

"The departure of M. Bradamanti will put old Séraphin out preciously!"
resumed Madame Pipelet. "I can't make out what she wants with him; but
she seems as much bent upon seeing him as he is on avoiding her; for he
charged me particularly not to tell her that he leaves Paris to-night at
six o'clock. So, when she calls again, she will find nobody at home;
that will give me an opportunity of talking to her about your young
person. Let's see, what is her name? Cissy--"

"Cecily!"

"Ah, I see! Just clap two more letters to the word I said,--that'll do.
I must tie a knot in the corner of my handkerchief, that I may be able
to recollect this bother of a name. Ciss--Cissy--Cecily--I've got it!"

"Well, now, I think it is time for me to visit Mlle. Rigolette," said
Rodolph to Madame Pipelet, as he quitted the lodge.

"And when you come down-stairs, M. Rodolph, I hope you will just speak a
word or two to my dear old darling of a husband. He has had a deal of
trouble lately, and I know it will be a great relief to him to tell you
all about it. That beast of a Cabrion has been at his old tricks
again!"

"Be assured, Madame Pipelet, I shall always be ready to sympathise with
your worthy husband in all his troubles."

And with these words Rodolph, strangely preoccupied with the recent
visit of Madame d'Orbigny to Polidori, slowly pursued his way to the
apartment of Mlle. Rigolette.


END OF VOLUME III.


       *       *       *       *       *
Transcriber's Notes:


This e-text was prepared from numbered edition 505 of the 1000 printed.

Minor punctuation and capitalization corrections have been made without
comment.

Minor typographical errors of single words, otherwise spelled correctly
throughout the text have been made without comment.

Contents, corrected printers error of Chapter III page reference from
page 109 to page 108.

p. 26, removed duplicate "and" (strictly and expressly forbidden)

p. 86, changed "ask" to "asked" ("...on the spot?" asked Rodolph.)

Word Variations appearing in the original text which have been retained:

"Duchess" and "Duchesse"
"good-by" and "good-bye"
"Halloa" and "Holloa"
"Saint-Remy" and "Saint Rémy"

Words using the [oe] ligature, which have been herein represented as
"oe": "subpoenaed", "_chef-d'oeuvre_", "phoenix", "Bureau des
Moeurs"

Throughout the text, illustrations and their captions were placed on
facing pages. For the purpose of this e-text these pages have been
combined into one entry.

Footnotes, originally at the bottom of a printed page, have been placed
directly below the paragraph in which their anchor symbol appears.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Mysteries of Paris, Volume 3 of 6, by
Eugène Sue

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MYSTERIES OF PARIS, V.3 ***

***** This file should be named 33802-8.txt or 33802-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/3/8/0/33802/

Produced by David Edwards, Christine Aldridge and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
(Stanford University, SUL Books in the Public Domain)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

Project Gutenberg's The Mysteries of Paris, Volume 4 of 6, by Eugène Sue

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Mysteries of Paris, Volume 4 of 6

Author: Eugène Sue

Illustrators: G. Mercier
              Bicknell
              Léon Poiteau
              Adrian Marcel

Release Date: September 22, 2010 [EBook #33803]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MYSTERIES OF PARIS, V.4 ***




Produced by David Edwards, Christine Aldridge and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
(Stanford University, SUL Books in the Public Domain)





Transcriber's Notes:

1. Passages in italics are surrounded by _underscores_.

2. Passages in Gothic Bold are surrounded by +plus+ signs.

3. Other transcription notes appear at the end of this e-text.




[Illustration: _The Abduction._
Original Etching by Mercier.]




+The Mysteries of Paris.+

  _ILLUSTRATED WITH ETCHINGS
  BY MERCIER, BICKNELL, POITEAU,
  AND ADRIAN MARCEL._

                 _BY EUGENE SUE_


      _IN SIX VOLUMES
         VOLUME IV._


       _PRINTED FOR
  FRANCIS A. NICCOLLS & CO.
          BOSTON_


     +Edition de Luxe+

_This edition is limited to one thousand copies,
of which this is_

          No.____




CONTENTS.


    CHAPTER                                               PAGE
          I. RIGOLETTE'S FIRST SORROW                       11
         II. THE WILL                                       33
        III. L'ILE DU RAVAGEUR                              48
         IV. THE FRESHWATER PIRATE                          60
          V. THE MOTHER AND SON                             82
         VI. FRANÇOIS AND AMANDINE                         101
        VII. A LODGING-HOUSE                               119
       VIII. THE VICTIMS OF MISPLACED CONFIDENCE           132
         IX. THE RUE DE CHAILLOT                           156
          X. THE COMTE DE SAINT-REMY                       170
         XI. THE INTERVIEW                                 185
        XII. THE SEARCH                                    204
       XIII. THE ADIEUX                                    226
        XIV. RECOLLECTIONS                                 239
         XV. THE BOATS                                     262
        XVI. THE HAPPINESS OF MEETINGS                     273
       XVII. DOCTOR GRIFFON                                298
      XVIII. THE PORTRAIT                                  305
        XIX. THE AGENT OF SAFETY                           315
         XX. THE CHOUETTE                                  321




ILLUSTRATIONS.

                                                          PAGE
      THE ABDUCTION                              _Frontispiece_
      THE BRIGAND DASHED AT HIS BROTHER                     87
      HE EXHIBITED SUCH FEROCIOUS JOY                      168
      WAS ABOUT TO EMBRACE HIS FATHER                      199




THE MYSTERIES OF PARIS.




CHAPTER I.

RIGOLETTE'S FIRST SORROW.


Rigolette's apartment was still in all its extreme nicety; the large
silver watch placed over the mantelpiece, in a small boxwood stand,
denoted the hour of four. The severe cold weather having ceased, the
thrifty little needlewoman had not lighted her stove.

From the window, a corner of blue sky was scarcely perceptible over the
masses of irregularly built roofs, garrets, and tall chimneys, which
bounded the horizon on the other side of the street. Suddenly a sunbeam,
which, as it were, wandered for a moment between two high gables, came
for an instant to purple with its bright rays the windows of the young
girl's chamber.

Rigolette was at work, seated by her window; and the soft shadow of her
charming profile stood out from the transparent light of the glass as a
cameo of rosy whiteness on a silver ground. Brilliant hues played on her
jet black hair, twisted in a knot at the back of her head, and shaded
with a warm amber colour the ivory of her industrious little fingers,
which plied the needle with incomparable activity. The long folds of her
brown gown, confined at the waist by the bands of her green apron, half
concealed her straw-seated chair, and her pretty feet rested on the edge
of a stool before her.

Like a rich lord, who sometimes amuses himself in hiding the walls of a
cottage beneath splendid hangings, the setting sun for a moment lighted
up this little chamber with a thousand dazzling fires, throwing his
golden tints on the curtains of gray and green stuff, and making the
walnut-tree furniture glisten with brightness, and the dry-rubbed floor
look like heated copper; whilst it encircled in a wire-work of gold the
grisette's bird-cage. But, alas! in spite of the exciting splendour of
this sun-ray, the two canaries (male and female) flitted about uneasily,
and, contrary to their usual habit, did not sing a note. This was
because, contrary to her usual habit, Rigolette did not sing. The three
never warbled without one another; almost invariably the cheerful and
matin song of the latter called forth that of the birds, who, more lazy,
did not leave their nests as early as their mistress. Then there were
rivalries,--contentions of clear, sonorous, pearly, silvery notes, in
which the birds had not always the advantage.

Rigolette did not sing, because, for the first time in her life, she
experienced a sorrow. Up to this time, the sight of the misery of the
Morels had often affected her; but such sights are too familiar to the
poorer classes to cause them any very lasting melancholy. After having,
almost every day, succoured these unfortunates as far as was in her
power, sincerely wept with and for them, the young girl felt herself at
the same time moved and satisfied,--moved by their misfortunes, and
satisfied at having shown herself pitiful. But this was not a sorrow.
Rigolette's natural gaiety soon regained its empire; and then, without
egotism, but by a simple fact of comparison, she found herself so happy
in her little chamber, after leaving the horrible den of the Morels,
that her momentary sadness speedily disappeared.

This lightness of impression was so little affected by personal feeling,
that, by a mode of extremely delicate reasoning, the grisette considered
it almost a duty to aid those more unhappy than herself, that she might
thus unscrupulously enjoy an existence so very precarious and entirely
dependent on her labour, but which, compared with the fearful distress
of the lapidary's family, appeared to her almost luxurious.

"In order to sing without compunction, when we have near us persons so
much to be pitied," she said, naïvely, "we must have been as charitable
to them as possible."

Before we inform our reader the cause of Rigolette's first sorrow, we
are desirous to assure him, or her, completely as to the virtue of this
young girl. We are sorry to use the word virtue,--a serious, pompous,
solemn word, which almost always brings with it ideas of painful
sacrifice, of painful struggle against the passions, of austere
meditations on the final close of all things here below. Such was not
the virtue of Rigolette. She had neither deeply struggled nor meditated;
she had worked, and laughed, and sung. Her prudence, as she called it,
when speaking frankly and sincerely to Rodolph, was with her a question
of time,--she had not the leisure to be in love. Particularly lively,
industrious, and orderly, order, work, and gaiety had often, unknown to
herself, defended, sustained, saved her.

It may be deemed, perchance, that this morality is light, frivolous,
casual; but of what consequence is the cause, so that the effect
endures? Of what consequence are the directions of the roots of a plant,
provided the flower blooms pure, expanded, and full of perfume?

Apropos of our utopianisms, as to the encouragement, help, and
recompenses which society ought to grant to artisans remarkable for
their eminent social qualities, we have alluded to that protection of
virtue (one of the projects of the Emperor, by the way). Let us suppose
this admirable idea realised. One of the real philanthropists whom the
Emperor proposed to employ in searching after worth has discovered
Rigolette. Abandoned without advice, without aid, exposed to all the
perils of poverty, to all the seductions with which youth and beauty are
surrounded, this charming girl has remained pure; her honest,
hard-working life might serve for a model and example. Would not this
young creature deserve, not a mere recompense, not succour only, but
some impressive words of approbation and encouragement, which would give
her a consciousness of her own worth, exalt her in her own eyes, and lay
on her obligations for the future? At least she would know that she was
followed by eyes full of solicitude and protection in the difficult path
in which she is progressing with so much courage and serenity; she would
know that, if one day the want of work or sickness threatened to destroy
the equilibrium of the poor and occupied life, which depends solely on
work and health, a slight help, due to her former deserts, would be
given to her.

People, no doubt, will exclaim against the impossibility of this
tutelary surveillance, which would surround persons particularly worthy
of interest through their previous excellent lives. It seems to us that
society has already resolved this problem. Has it not already imagined
the superintendence of the police, for life or for a period, for the
most useful purpose of constantly controlling the conduct of dangerous
persons, noted for the infamy of their former lives? Why does not
society exercise also a superintendence of moral charity?

But let us leave the lofty stilts of our utopianisms, and return to the
cause of Rigolette's first sorrow.

With the exception of Germain, a well-behaved, open-hearted young man,
the grisette's neighbours had all, at first, begun on terms of
familiarity, believing her offers of good neighbourship were little
flirtations; but these gentlemen had been compelled to admit, with as
much astonishment as annoyance, that they found in Rigolette an amiable
and mirthful companion for their Sunday excursions, a pleasant
neighbour, and a kind-hearted creature, but not a mistress. Their
surprise and their annoyance, at first very great, gradually gave way
before the frank and even temper of the grisette; and then, as she had
sagaciously said to Rodolph, her neighbours were proud on Sundays to
have on their arms a pretty girl, who was an honour to them in every way
(Rigolette was quite regardless of appearances), and who only cost them
the share of the moderate pleasures, whose value was doubled by her
presence and nice appearance. Besides, the dear girl was so easily
contented! In her days of penury she dined well and gaily off a morsel
of warm cake, which she nibbled with all the might of her little white
teeth; after which, she amused herself so much with a walk on the
boulevards or in the arcades.

If our readers feel but little sympathy with Rigolette, they will at
least confess that a person must be very absurd, or very cruel, to
refuse once a week these simple amusements to so delightful a creature,
who, besides having no right to be jealous, never prevented her
cavaliers from consoling themselves for her cruelty by flirtations with
other damsels.

François Germain alone never founded any vain hopes on the familiarity
of the young girl, but, either from instinct of heart or delicacy of
mind, he guessed from the first day how very agreeable the singular
companionship of Rigolette might be made.

What might be imagined happened, and Germain fell passionately in love
with his neighbour, without daring to say a word to her of his love.

Far from imitating his predecessors, who, convinced of the vanity of
their pursuit, had consoled themselves with other loves, without being
on that account the less on good terms with their neighbour, Germain had
most supremely enjoyed his intimacy with the young girl, passing with
her not only his Sunday but every evening when he was not engaged.
During these long hours Rigolette was, as usual, merry and laughing;
Germain tender, attentive, serious, and often somewhat sad. This
sadness was his only drawback, for his manners, naturally good, were not
to be compared with the foppery of M. Girandeau, the commercial
traveller, alias bagman, or with the noisy eccentricities of Cabrion;
but M. Girandeau by his unending loquacity, and the painter by his
equally interminable fun, took the lead of Germain, whose quiet
composure rather astonished his little neighbour, the grisette.

Rigolette then had not, as yet, testified any decided preference for any
one of her beaux; but as she was by no means deficient in judgment, she
soon discovered that Germain alone united all the qualities requisite
for making a reasonable woman happy.

Having stated all these facts, we will inquire why Rigolette was sad,
and why neither she nor her birds sang. Her oval and fresh-looking face
was rather pale; her large black eyes, usually gay and brilliant, were
slightly dulled and veiled; whilst her whole look bespoke unusual
fatigue. She had been working nearly all the night; from time to time
she looked sorrowfully at a letter which lay open on a table near her.
This letter had been addressed to her by Germain, and contained as
follows:

                                  "PRISON OF THE CONCIERGERIE.

      "MADEMOISELLE:--The place from which I address you will
    sufficiently prove to you the extent of my misfortune,--I am
    locked up as a robber. I am guilty in the eyes of all the world,
    and yet I am bold enough to write to you! It is because it
    would, indeed, be dreadful to me to believe that you consider me
    as a degraded criminal. I beseech you not to condemn me until
    you have perused this letter. If you discard me, that will be
    the final blow, and will indeed overwhelm me. I will tell you
    all that has passed. For some time I had left the Rue du Temple,
    but I knew through poor Louise that the Morel family, in whom
    you and I took such deep interest, were daily more and more
    wretched. Alas, my pity for these poor people has been my
    destruction! I do not repent it, but my fate is very cruel. Last
    night I had stayed very late at M. Ferrand's, occupied with
    business of importance. In the room in which I was at work was a
    bureau, in which my employer shut up every day the work I had
    done. This evening he appeared much disturbed and troubled, and
    said to me, 'Do not leave until these accounts are finished, and
    then put them in the bureau, the key of which I will leave with
    you;' and then he left the room. When my work was done I opened
    the drawer to put it away, when, mechanically, my eyes were
    attracted by an open letter, on which I read the name of Jérome
    Morel, the lapidary. I confess that, seeing that it referred to
    this unfortunate man, I had the indiscretion to read this
    letter; and I learnt that the artisan was to be arrested next
    day on an overdue bill of thirteen hundred francs, at the suit
    of M. Ferrand, who, under an assumed name, had imprisoned him.
    This information was from an agent employed by M. Ferrand. I
    knew enough of the situation of the Morel family to be aware of
    the terrible blow which the imprisonment of their only support
    must inflict upon them, and I was equally distressed and
    indignant. Unfortunately I saw in the same drawer an open box,
    with two thousand francs in gold in it. At this moment I heard
    Louise coming up the stairs, and without reflecting on the
    seriousness of my offence, but profiting by the opportunity
    which chance offered, I took thirteen hundred francs, went to
    her in the passage, and put the money in her hand, saying, 'They
    are going to arrest your father to-morrow at daybreak, for
    thirteen hundred francs,--here they are. Save him, but do not
    say that the money comes from me. M. Ferrand is a bad man.' You
    see, mademoiselle, my intention was good, but my conduct
    culpable. I conceal nothing from you, but this is my excuse. By
    dint of saving for a long time I had realised, and placed with a
    banker, the sum of fifteen hundred francs, but the cashier of
    the banker never came to the office before noon. Morel was to be
    arrested at daybreak, and therefore it was necessary that she
    should have the money so as to pay it in good time; if not, even
    if I could have gone in the day to release him from prison,
    still he would be arrested and carried off in presence of his
    wife, whom such a blow must have killed. Besides, the heavy
    costs of the writ would have been added to the expenses of the
    lapidary. You will understand, I dare say, that all these new
    misfortunes would not have befallen me if I had been able to
    restore the thirteen hundred francs I had taken back again to
    the bureau before M. Ferrand discovered anything; unfortunately,
    I fell into that mistake. I left M. Ferrand's, and was no longer
    under the impression of indignation and pity which had impelled
    me to the step. I began to reflect upon all the dangers of my
    position. A thousand fears then came to assail me. I knew the
    notary's severity, and he might come after I left and search in
    his bureau and discover the theft; for in his eyes--in the eyes
    of the world--it is a theft. These thoughts overwhelmed me, and,
    late as it was, I ran to the banker's to supplicate him to give
    me my money instantly. I should have found an excuse for this
    urgent request, and then I should have returned to M. Ferrand
    and replaced the money I had taken. By an unlucky chance, the
    banker had gone to Belleville for two days, to his
    country-house, where he was engaged in some plantations.
    Everything seemed to conspire against me. I waited for daybreak
    with intense anxiety, and hastened to Belleville,--the banker
    had just left for Paris. I returned, saw him, obtained my money,
    hastened to M. Ferrand; everything was discovered. But this is
    only a portion of my misfortunes. The notary at once accused me
    of having robbed him of fifteen thousand francs in bank-notes,
    which, he declared, were in the drawer of the bureau, with the
    two thousand francs in gold. This was a base accusation,--an
    infamous lie! I confess myself guilty of the first abstraction,
    but, by all that is most sacred in the world, I swear to you,
    mademoiselle, that I am innocent of the second. I never saw a
    bank-note in the drawer. There were only two thousand francs in
    gold, from which I took the thirteen hundred francs I have
    mentioned. This is the truth, mademoiselle. I am under this
    terrible accusation, and yet I affirm that you ought to know me
    incapable of a lie. But will you,--do you believe me? Alas, as
    M. Ferrand said, 'he who has taken a small sum may equally have
    taken a large amount, and his word does not deserve belief.' I
    have always seen you so good and devoted to the unhappy,
    mademoiselle, and I know you are so frank and liberal-minded,
    that your heart will guide you in the just appreciation of the
    truth, I hope. I do not ask any more. Give credit to my words,
    and you will find in me as much to pity as to blame; for, I
    repeat to you, my intention was good, and circumstances
    impossible to foresee have destroyed me. Oh, Mlle. Rigolette, I
    am very unhappy! If you knew in the midst of what a set of
    persons I am doomed to exist until my trial is over! Yesterday
    they took me to a place which they call the dépôt of the
    prefecture of police. I cannot tell you what I felt when, after
    having gone up a dark staircase, I reached a door with an iron
    wicket, which was opened and soon closed upon me. I was so
    troubled in my mind that I could not, at first, distinguish
    anything. A hot and fetid air came upon me, and I heard a loud
    noise of voices mingled with sinister laughs, angry
    exclamations, and depraved songs. I remained motionless at the
    door for awhile, looking at the stone flooring of the apartment,
    and neither daring to advance nor lift up my eyes, thinking
    that everybody was looking at me. They were not, however,
    thinking of me; for a prisoner more or less does not at all
    disturb these men. At last I ventured to look up, and, oh, what
    horrid countenances! What ragged wretches! What dirty and
    bespattered garments! All the exterior marks of misery and vice!
    There were forty or fifty seated, standing, or lying on benches
    secured to the wall,--vagrants, robbers, assassins, and all who
    had been apprehended during the night and day. When they
    perceived me I found a sad consolation in seeing that they did
    not recognise me as belonging or known to them. Some of them
    looked at me with an insulting and derisive air, and then began
    to talk amongst themselves in a low tone, and in some horrible
    jargon, not one word of which did I understand. After a short
    time one of the most brutal amongst them came, and, slapping me
    on the shoulder, asked me for money to pay my footing. I gave
    them some silver, hoping thus to purchase repose; but it was not
    enough, and they demanded more, which I refused. Then several of
    them surrounded me and assailed me with threats and
    imprecations, and were proceeding to extremities, when,
    fortunately for me, a turnkey entered, who had been attracted by
    the noise. I complained to him, and he insisted on their
    restoring to me the money I had given them already, adding that,
    if I liked to pay a small fee, I should go to what is called the
    pistole; that is, be in a cell to myself. I accepted the offer
    gratefully, and left these ruffians in the midst of their loud
    menaces for the future; 'for,' said they, 'we are sure to meet
    again, when I could not get away from them.' The turnkey
    conducted me to a cell, where I passed the rest of the night. It
    is from here that I now write to you, Mlle. Rigolette. Directly
    after my examination I shall be taken to another prison, called
    La Force, where I expect to meet many of my companions in the
    station-house. The turnkey, interested by my grief and tears,
    has promised me to forward this letter to you, although such
    kindnesses are strictly forbidden. I ask, Mlle. Rigolette, a
    last service of your friendship, if, indeed, you do not blush
    now for such an intimacy. In case you will kindly grant my
    request, it is this: With this letter you will receive a small
    key, and a line for the porter of the house I live in, Boulevard
    St. Denis, No. 11. I inform him that you will act as if it were
    myself with respect to everything that belongs to me, and that
    he is to attend to your instructions. He will take you to my
    room, and you will have the goodness to open my _secrétaire_
    with the key I send you herewith. In this you will find a large
    packet containing different papers, which I beg of you to take
    care of for me. One of them was intended for you, as you will
    see by the address; others have been written of you, in happier
    days. Do not be angry. I did not think they would ever come to
    your knowledge. I beg you, also, to take the small sum of money
    which is in this drawer, as well as a satin bag, which contains
    a small orange silk handkerchief, which you wore when we used to
    go out on Sundays, and which you gave me on the day I quitted
    the Rue du Temple. I should wish that, excepting a little linen
    which you will be so good as send to me at La Force, you would
    sell the furniture and things I possess; for, whether acquitted
    or found guilty, I must of necessity be obliged to quit Paris.
    Where shall I go? What are my resources? God only knows. Madame
    Bouvard, the saleswoman of the Temple, who has already sold and
    bought for me many things, will perhaps take all the furniture,
    etc., at once. She is a very fair-dealing woman, and this would
    save you a great deal of trouble, for I know how precious your
    time is. I have paid my rent in advance, and I have, therefore,
    only to ask you to give a small present to the porter. Excuse,
    mademoiselle, the trouble of these details; but you are the only
    person in the world to whom I dare and can address myself. I
    might, perhaps, have asked one of M. Ferrand's clerks to do this
    service for me, as we were on friendly terms, but I feared his
    curiosity as to certain papers. Several concern you, as I have
    said, and others relate to the sad events in my life. Ah,
    believe me, Mlle. Rigolette, if you grant me this last favour,
    this last proof of former regard, it will be my only consolation
    under the great affliction in which I am plunged; and, in spite
    of all, I hope you will not refuse me. I also beg of you to give
    me permission to write to you sometimes. It will be so
    consoling, so comforting to me, to be able to pour out my heavy
    sorrows into a kind heart. Alas, I am alone in the world,--no
    one takes the slightest interest in me! This isolation was
    before most painful to me. Think what it must be now! And yet I
    am honest, and have the consciousness of never having injured
    any one, and of always having, at the peril of my life,
    testified my aversion for what is wicked and wrong; as you will
    see by the papers, which I pray of you to take care of, and
    which you may read. But when I say this, who will believe me? M.
    Ferrand is respected by all the world; his reputation for
    probity is long established; he has a just cause of accusation
    against me, and he will crush me. I resign myself at once to my
    fate. Now, Mlle. Rigolette, if you do believe me, you will not,
    I hope, feel any contempt for me, but pity me; and you will,
    perhaps, carry your generosity so far as to come one day,--some
    Sunday (alas, what recollections that word brings up!)--some
    Sunday, to see me in the reception-room of my prison. But no,
    no; I never could dare to see you in such a place! Yet you are
    so good, so kind, that--if--I am compelled to break off this
    letter and send it to you at once, with the key, and a line for
    the porter, which I write in great haste. The turnkey has come
    to tell me that I am going directly before the magistrate.
    Adieu, adieu, Mlle. Rigolette! Do not discard me, for my hope is
    in you, and in you only!

                                            "FRANÇOIS GERMAIN.

      "P. S.--If you reply, address your letter to me at the prison
    of La Force."

We may now divine the cause of Rigolette's first sorrow.

Her excellent heart was deeply wounded at a misfortune of which she had
no suspicion until that moment. She believed unhesitatingly in the
entire veracity of the statement of Germain, the unfortunate son of the
Schoolmaster.

Not very strait-laced, she thought her old neighbour exaggerated his
fault immensely. To save the unhappy father of a family, he had
momentarily appropriated a sum which he thought he could instantly
refund. This action, in the grisette's eyes, was but generous.

By one of those contradictions common to women, and especially to women
of her class, this young girl, who until then had not felt for Germain
more than her other neighbours, but a kind and mirthful friendship, now
experienced for him a decided preference. As soon as she knew that he
was unfortunate, unjustly accused, and a prisoner, his remembrance
effaced that of all his former rivals. Yet Rigolette did not all at once
feel intense love, but a warm and sincere affection, full of pity and
determined devotion,--a sentiment which was the more new with her in
consequence of the better sensations it brought with it.

Such was the moral position of Rigolette when Rodolph entered her
chamber, having first rapped very discreetly at the door.

"Good morning, neighbour," said Rodolph to Rigolette; "do not let me
disturb you."

"Not at all, neighbour. On the contrary, I am delighted to see you, for
I have had something to vex me dreadfully."

"Why, in truth, you look very pale, and appear as though you had been
weeping."

"Indeed, I have been weeping, and for a good reason. Poor Germain!
There--read!" And Rigolette handed the letter of the prisoner to
Rodolph. "Is not that enough to break one's heart? You told me you took
an interest in him,--now's the time to prove it!" she added, whilst
Rodolph was attentively reading the letter. "Is that wicked old M.
Ferrand at war with all the world? First he attacked that poor Louise,
and now he assails Germain. Oh, I am not ill-natured; but if some great
harm happened to this notary, I should really be glad! To accuse such an
honest young man of having stolen fifteen thousand francs from him!
Germain, too! He who was honesty itself! And such a steady, serious
young man; and so sad, too! Oh, he is indeed to be pitied, in the midst
of all these wretches in his prison! Ah, M. Rodolph, from to-day I begin
to see that life is not all _couleur-de-rose_."

"And what do you propose to do, my little neighbour?"

"What do I mean to do? Why, of course, all that Germain asks of me, and
as quickly as possible. I should have been gone before now, but for this
work, which is required in great haste, and which I must take instantly
to the Rue St. Honoré, on my way to Germain's room, where I am going to
get the papers he speaks of. I have passed part of the night at work,
that I might be forward. I shall have so many things to do besides my
usual work that I must be excessively methodical. In the first place,
Madame Morel is very anxious that I should see Louise in prison. That
will be a hard task, but I shall try to do it. Unfortunately, I do not
know to whom I should address myself."

"I had thought of that."

"You, neighbour?"

"Here is an order."

"How fortunate! Can't you procure me also an order for the prison of
poor, unhappy Germain? He would be so delighted!"

"I will also find you the means of seeing Germain."

"Oh, thank you, M. Rodolph."

"You will not be afraid, then, of going to his prison?"

"Certainly not; although my heart will beat very violently the first
time. But that's nothing. When Germain was free, was he not always ready
to anticipate all my wishes, and take me to the theatre, for a walk, or
read to me of an evening? Well, and now he is in trouble, it is my turn.
A poor little mouse like me cannot do much, I know that well enough; but
all I can do I will do, that he may rely upon. He shall find that I am a
sincere friend. But, M. Rodolph, there is one thing which pains me, and
that is that he should doubt me,--that he should suppose me capable of
despising him! I!--and for what, I should like to know? That old notary
accuses him of robbery. I know it is not true. Germain's letter has
proved to me that he is innocent, even if I had thought him guilty. You
have only to see him, and you would feel certain that he is incapable of
a bad action. A person must be as wicked as M. Ferrand to assert such
atrocious falsehoods."

"Bravo, neighbour; I like your indignation."

"Oh, how I wish I were a man, that I might go to this notary and say to
him, 'Oh, you say that Germain has robbed you, do you? Well, then,
that's for you! And that he cannot steal from you, at all events?' And
thump--thump--thump, I would beat him till I couldn't stand over him."

"You administer justice very expeditiously," said Rodolph, smiling.

"Because it makes my blood boil. And, as Germain says in his letter,
all the world will side with his employer, because he is rich and looked
up to, whilst Germain is poor and unprotected, unless you will come to
his assistance, M. Rodolph,--you who know such benevolent persons. Do
not you think that something could be done?"

"He must await his sentence. Once acquitted, as I believe he will be, he
will not want for proofs of the interest taken in him. But listen,
neighbour; for I know I may rely on your discretion."

"Oh, yes, M. Rodolph, I never blab."

"Well, then, no one must know--not even Germain himself--that he has
friends who are watching over him,--for he has friends."

"Really!"

"Very powerful and devoted."

"It would give him much courage to know that."

"Unquestionably; but perhaps he might not keep it to himself. Then M.
Ferrand, alarmed, would be on his guard,--his suspicions would be
aroused; and, as he is very cunning, it would become very difficult to
catch him, which would be most annoying; for not only must Germain's
innocence be made clear, but his denouncer must be unmasked."

"I understand, M. Rodolph."

"It is the same with Louise; and I bring you this order to see her, that
you may beg of her not to tell any person what she disclosed to me. She
will know what that means."

"I understand, M. Rodolph."

"In a word, let Louise beware of complaining in prison of her master's
wickedness. This is most important. But she must conceal nothing from
the barrister who will come from me to talk with her as to the grounds
of her defence. Be sure you tell her all this."

"Make yourself easy, neighbour, I will forget nothing; I have an
excellent memory. But, when we talk of goodness, it is you who are so
good and kind. If any one is in trouble, then you come directly."

"I have told you, my good little neighbour, that I am but a poor clerk;
but when I meet with good persons who deserve protection, I instantly
tell a benevolent individual who has entire confidence in me, and they
are helped at once. That's all I do in the matter."

"And where are you lodging, now you have given up your chamber to the
Morels?"

"I live in a furnished lodging."

"Oh, how I should hate that! To be where all the world has been before
you, it is as if everybody had been in your place."

"I am only there at nights, and then--"

"I understand,--it is less disagreeable. Yet I shouldn't like it, M.
Rodolph. My home made me so happy, I had got into such a quiet way of
living, that I did not think it was possible I should ever know a
sorrow. And yet, you see--But no, I cannot describe to you the blow
which Germain's misfortune has brought upon me. I have seen the Morels,
and others beside, who were very much to be pitied certainly. But, at
best, misery is misery; and amongst poor folk, who look for it, it does
not surprise them, and they help one another as well as they can. To-day
it is one, to-morrow it is another. As for oneself, what with courage
and good spirit, one extricates oneself. But to see a poor young man,
honest and good, who has been your friend for a long time,--to see him
accused of robbery, and imprisoned and huddled up with criminals!--ah,
really, M. Rodolph, I cannot get over that; it is a misfortune I had
never thought of, and it quite upsets me."

"Courage, courage! Your spirits will return when your friend is
acquitted."

"Oh, yes, he must be acquitted. The judges have only to read his letter
to me, and that would be enough,--would it not, M. Rodolph?"

"Really, this letter has all the appearance of truth. You must let me
have a copy of it, for it will be necessary for Germain's defence."

"Certainly, M. Rodolph. If I did not write such a scrawl, in spite of
the lessons which good Germain gave me, I would offer to copy it myself;
but my writing is so large, so crooked, and has so many, many faults."

"I will only ask you to trust the letter with me until to-morrow
morning."

"There it is; but you will take great care of it, I hope. I have burnt
all the notes which M. Cabrion and M. Girandeau wrote me in the
beginning of our acquaintance, with flaming hearts and doves at the top
of the paper, when they thought I was to be caught by their tricks and
cajoleries; but this poor letter of Germain's I will keep carefully, as
well as the others, if he writes me any more; for they, you know, M.
Rodolph, will show in my favour that he has asked these small
services,--won't they, M. Rodolph?"

"Most assuredly; and they will prove that you are the best little friend
any one can desire. But, now I think of it, instead of going alone to
Germain's room, shall I accompany you?"

"With pleasure, neighbour. The night is coming on, and, in the evening,
I do not like to be alone in the streets; besides that, I have my work
to carry nearly as far as the Palais Royal. But perhaps it will fatigue
and annoy you to go so far?"

"Not at all. We will have a coach."

"Really! Oh, how pleased I should be to go in a coach if I had not so
much to make me melancholy! And I really must be melancholy, for this is
the first day since I have been here that I have not sung during the
day. My birds are really quite astonished. Poor little dears! They
cannot make it out. Two or three times Papa Crétu has piped a little to
try me; I endeavoured to answer him, but, after a minute or two, I
began to cry. Ramonette then began; but I could not answer one any
better than the other."

"What singular names you have given your birds: Papa Crétu and
Ramonette!"

"Why, M. Rodolph, my birds are the joy of my solitude,--my best friends;
and I have given them the names of the worthy couple who were the joy of
my childhood, and were also my best friends, not forgetting that, to
complete the resemblance, Papa Crétu and Ramonette were gay, and sang
like birds."

"Ah, now, yes, I remember, your adopted parents were called so."

"Yes, neighbour, they are ridiculous names for birds, I know; but that
concerns no one but myself. And besides, it was in this very point that
Germain showed his good heart."

"In what way?"

"Why, M. Girandeau and M. Cabrion--especially M. Cabrion--were always
making their jokes on the names of my birds. To call a canary Papa
Crétu! There never was such nonsense as M. Cabrion made of it, and his
jests were endless. If it was a cock bird, he said, 'Why, that would be
well enough to call him Crétu. As to Ramonette, that's well enough for a
hen canary, for it resembles Ramona.' In fact, he quite wore my patience
out, and for two Sundays I would not go out with him in order to teach
him a lesson; and I told him very seriously, that if he began his
tricks, which annoyed me so much, we should never go out together
again."

"What a bold resolve!"

"Yes, it was really a sacrifice on my part, M. Rodolph, for I was always
looking forward with delight to my Sundays, and I was very much tried by
being kept in all alone in such beautiful weather. But that's nothing. I
preferred sacrificing my Sundays to hearing M. Cabrion continue to make
ridicule of those whom I respected. Certainly, after that, but for the
idea I attached to them, I should have preferred giving my birds other
names; and, you must know, there is one name which I adore,--it is
Colibri.[1] I did not change, because I never will call those birds by
any other name than Crétu and Ramonette; if I did, I should seem to make
a sacrifice, that I forgot my good, adopted parents,--don't you think
so, M. Rodolph?"

  [1] Colibri is a celebrated chanson of Béranger, the especial
  poet of grisettes.--_English Translator_.

"You are right a thousand times over. And Germain did not turn these
names into a jest, eh?"

"On the contrary, the first time he heard them he thought them droll,
like every one else, and that was natural enough. But when I explained
to him my reasons, as I had many times explained them to M. Cabrion,
tears started to his eyes. From that time I said to myself, M. Germain
is very kind-hearted, and there is nothing to be said against him, but
his weeping so. And so, you see, M. Rodolph, my reproaching him with his
sadness has made me unhappy now. Then I could not understand why any one
was melancholy, but now I understand it but too well. But now my packet
is completed, and my work is ready for delivery. Will you hand me my
shawl, neighbour? It is not cold enough to take a cloak, is it?"

"We shall go and return in a coach."

"True; we shall go and return very quickly, and that will be so much
gained."

"But, now I think of it, what are you to do? Your work will suffer from
your visits to the prison."

"Oh, no, no; I have made my calculations. In the first place, I have my
Sundays to myself, so I shall go and see Louise and Germain on those
days; that will serve me for a walk and a change. Then, in the week, I
shall go again to the prison once or twice. Each time will occupy me
three good hours, won't it? Well, to manage this comfortably, I shall
work an hour more every day, and go to bed at twelve o'clock instead of
eleven o'clock; that will be a clear gain of seven or eight hours a
week, which I can employ in going to see Louise and Germain. You see I
am richer than I appear," added Rigolette, with a smile.

"And you have no fear that you will be overfatigued?"

"Bah! Not at all; I shall manage it. And, besides, it can't last for
ever."

"Here is your shawl, neighbour."

"Fasten it; and mind you don't prick me."

"Ah, the pin is bent."

"Well, then, clumsy, take another then,--from the pincushion. Ah, I
forgot! Will you do me a great favour, neighbour?"

"Command me, neighbour."

"Mend me a good pen, with a broad nib, so that when I return I may write
to poor Germain, and tell him I have executed all his commissions. He
will have my letter to-morrow morning in the prison, and that will give
him pleasure."

"Where are your pens?"

"There,--on the table; the knife is in the drawer. Wait until I light my
taper, for it begins to grow dusk."

"Yes, I shall see better how to mend the pen."

"And I how to tie my cap."

Rigolette lighted a lucifer-match, and lighted a wax-end in a small
bright candlestick.

"The deuce,--a wax-light! Why, neighbour, what extravagance!"

"Oh, what I burn costs but a very small trifle more than a candle, and
it's so much cleaner!"

"Not much dearer?"

"Indeed, they are not! I buy these wax-ends by the pound, and a half a
pound lasts nearly a year."

"But," said Rodolph, who was mending the pen very carefully, whilst the
grisette was tying on her cap before the glass, "I do not see any
preparations for your dinner."

"I have not the least appetite. I took a cup of milk this morning, and I
shall take another this evening, with a small piece of bread, and that
will be enough for me."

"Then you will not take a dinner with me quietly after we have been to
Germain's?"

"Thank you, neighbour; but I am not in spirits,--my heart is too
heavy,--another time with pleasure. But the evening when poor Germain
leaves his prison, I invite myself, and afterwards you shall take me to
the theatre. Is that a bargain?"

"It is, neighbour; and I assure you I will not forget the engagement.
But you refuse me this to-day?"

"Yes, M. Rodolph. I should be a very dull companion, without saying a
word about the time it would occupy me; for, you see, at this moment, I
really cannot afford to be idle, or waste one single quarter of an
hour."

"Then, for to-day I renounce the pleasure."

"There is my parcel, neighbour. Now go out first, and I will lock the
door."

"Here's a capital pen for you; and now for the parcel."

"Mind you don't rumple it; it is _pout-de-soie_, and soon creases. Hold
it in your hand,--carefully,--there, in that way; that's it. Now go, and
I will show you a light."

And Rodolph descended the staircase, followed by Rigolette.

At the moment when the two neighbours were passing by the door of the
porter's lodge they saw M. Pipelet, who, with his arms hanging down, was
advancing towards them from the bottom of the passage, holding in one
hand the sign which announced his Partnership of Friendship with
Cabrion, and in the other the portrait of the confounded painter.
Alfred's despair was so overwhelming that his chin touched his breast,
so that the wide crown of his bell-shaped hat was easily seen. Seeing
him thus, with his head lowered, coming towards Rodolph and Rigolette,
he might have been compared to a ram, or a brave Breton, preparing for
combat.

Anastasie soon appeared on the threshold of the lodge, and exclaimed, at
her husband's appearance:

"Well, dearest old boy, here you are! And what did the commissary say to
you? Alfred, Alfred, mind what you're doing, or you'll poke your head
against my king of lodgers. Excuse him, M. Rodolph. It is that vagabond
of a Cabrion, who uses him worse and worse. He'll certainly turn my dear
old darling into a donkey! Alfred, love, speak to me!"

At this voice, so dear to his heart, M. Pipelet raised his head. His
features were impressed with a bitter agony.

"What did the commissary say to you?" inquired Anastasie.

"Anastasie, we must collect the few things we possess, embrace our
friends, pack up our trunk, and expatriate ourselves from Paris,--from
France,--from my beautiful France; for now, assured of impunity, the
monster is capable of pursuing me everywhere, throughout the length and
breadth of the departments of the kingdom."

"What, the commissary?"

"The commissary," exclaimed M. Pipelet, with fierce indignation,--"the
commissary laughed in my teeth!"

"At you,--a man of mature age, with an air so respectable that you would
appear as silly as a goose if one did not know your virtues?"

"Well, notwithstanding that, when I had respectfully deposed in his
presence my mass of complaints and vexations against that infernal
Cabrion, the magistrate, after having looked and laughed--yes, laughed,
and, I may add, laughed indecorously--at the sign and the portrait
which I brought with me as corroborative testimony,--the magistrate
replied, 'My good fellow, this Cabrion is a wag,--a practical joker. But
pay no attention to his pleasantries. I advise you to laugh at him, and
heartily, too, for really there is ample cause to do so.' 'To laugh at
it, sir-r-r!' I exclaimed,--'to laugh at it, when grief consumes
me,--when this scamp poisons my very existence; he placards me, and will
drive me out of my wits. I demand that they imprison, exile the
monster,--at least from my street!' At these words the commissary
smiled, and politely pointed to the door. I understood the magistrate,
sighed, and--and--here I am!"

"Good-for-nothing magistrate!" exclaimed Madame Pipelet.

"It is all over, Anastasie,--all is ended,--hope ceases. There's no
justice in France; I am really atrociously sacrificed."

And, by way of peroration, M. Pipelet dashed the sign and portrait to
the farther end of the passage with all his force. Rodolph and Rigolette
had in the shade smiled at M. Pipelet's despair. After having said a few
words of consolation to Alfred, whom Anastasie was trying to calm as
well as she could, the king of lodgers left the house in the Rue du
Temple with Rigolette, and they both got into a coach to go to François
Germain's.




CHAPTER II.

THE WILL.


François Germain resided No. 11 Boulevard St. Denis. It may not be amiss
to recall to the reader, who has probably forgotten the circumstance,
that Madame Mathieu, the diamond-matcher, whose name has been already
mentioned as the person for whom Morel the lapidary worked, lodged in
the same house as Germain. During the long ride from the Rue du Temple
to the Rue St. Honoré, where dwelt the dressmaker for whom Rigolette
worked, Rodolph had ample opportunities of more fully appreciating the
fine natural disposition of his companion. Like all instinctively noble
and devoted characters, she appeared utterly unconscious of the delicacy
and generosity of her conduct, all she said and did seeming to her as
the most simple and matter-of-course thing possible.

Nothing would have been more easy than for Rodolph to provide liberally
both for Rigolette's present and future wants, and thus to have enabled
her to carry her consoling attentions to Louise and Germain, without
grieving over the loss of that time which was necessarily taken from her
work,--her sole dependence; but the prince was unwilling to diminish the
value of the grisette's devotion by removing all the difficulties, and,
although firmly resolved to bestow a rich reward on the rare and
beautiful qualities he hourly discovered in her, he determined to follow
her to the termination of this new and interesting trial. It is scarcely
necessary to say that, had the health of the young girl appeared to
suffer in the smallest degree from the increase of labour she so
courageously imposed on herself, in order to dedicate a portion of each
week to the unhappy daughter of the lapidary and the son of the
Schoolmaster, Rodolph would instantaneously have stepped forward to her
aid; and he continued to study with equal pleasure and emotion the
workings of a nature so naturally disposed to view everything on its
sunny side, so full of internal happiness, and so little accustomed to
sorrow that occasionally she would smile, and seem the mirthful creature
nature had made her, spite of all the grief by which she was surrounded.

At the end of about an hour, the _fiacre_, returning from the Rue St.
Honoré, stopped before a modest, unpretending sort of house, situated
No. 11 Boulevard St. Denis. Rodolph assisted Rigolette to alight. The
young sempstress then proceeded to the porter's lodge, where she
communicated Germain's intentions, without forgetting the promised
gratuity.

Owing to the extreme amenity of his disposition, the son of the
Schoolmaster was unusually beloved, and the _confrère_ of M. Pipelet was
deeply grieved to learn that so quiet and well-conducted a lodger was
about to quit the house, and to that purpose the worthy porter warmly
expressed himself. Having obtained a light, Rigolette proceeded to
rejoin her companion, having first arranged with the porter that he
should not follow her up-stairs till a time she indicated should have
elapsed, and then merely to receive his final orders. The chamber
occupied by Germain was situated on the fourth floor. When they reached
the door, Rigolette handed the key to Rodolph, saying:

"Here, will you open the door? My hand trembles so violently, I cannot
do it. I fear you will laugh at me. But, when I think that poor Germain
will never more enter this room, I seem as though I were about to pass
the threshold of a chamber of death."

"Come, come, my good neighbour, try and exert yourself; you must not
indulge such thoughts as these."

"I know it is wrong; but, indeed, I cannot help it." And here Rigolette
tried to dry up the tears with which her eyes were filled.

Without being equally affected as his companion, Rodolph still
experienced a deep and painful emotion as he penetrated into this humble
abode. Well aware of the detestable pertinacity with which the
accomplices of the Schoolmaster pursued, and were possibly still
pursuing, Germain, he pictured to himself the many hours the unfortunate
youth was constrained to pass in this cheerless solitude. Rigolette
placed the light on the table. Nothing could possibly be more simple
than the fittings-up of the apartment itself. Its sole furniture
consisted of a small bed, a chest of drawers, a walnut-tree bureau, four
rush-bottomed chairs, and a table; white calico curtains hung from the
windows and around the bed. The only ornament the mantelpiece presented
was a water-bottle and glass. The bed was made; but, by the impression
left on it, it would seem that Germain had thrown himself on it without
undressing on the night previous to his arrest.

"Poor fellow!" said Rigolette, sadly, as she examined each minute detail
of the interior of the apartment; "it is very easy to see I was not near
him. His room is tidy, to be sure, but not as neat as it ought to be.
Everything is covered with dust. The curtains are smoke-dried, the
windows want cleaning, and the floor is not kept as it should be. Oh,
dear, what a difference! The Rue du Temple was not a better room, but it
had a much more cheerful look, because everything was kept so bright and
clean,--like in my apartment!"

"Because in the Rue du Temple he had the benefit of your advice and
assistance."

"Oh, pray look here!" cried Rigolette, pointing to the bed. "Only
see,--the poor fellow never went to bed at all the last night he was
here! How uneasy he must have been! See, he has left his handkerchief on
his pillow, quite wet with his tears! I can see that plainly enough."
Then, taking up the handkerchief, she added, "Germain has kept a small,
orange-coloured silk cravat I gave him once during our happy days. I
have a great mind to keep this handkerchief in remembrance of his
misfortune. Do you think he would be angry?"

"On the contrary, he would but be too much delighted with such a mark of
your affection."

"Ah, but we must not indulge in such thoughts now; let us attend to more
serious matters. I will make up a parcel of linen from the contents of
those drawers, ready to take to the prison, and Mother Bouvard, whom I
will send to-morrow, will see to the rest; but first of all I will open
the bureau, in order to get out the papers and money Germain wished me
to take charge of."

"But, now I think of it, Louise Morel gave me back yesterday the
thirteen hundred francs in gold she received from Germain, to pay the
lapidary's debt, which I had already discharged. I have this money about
me; it justly belongs to Germain, since he repaid the notary what he
withdrew from the cash-box. I will place it in your hands, in order that
you may add it to the sum entrusted to your care."

"Just as you like, M. Rodolph, although really I should prefer not
having so large a sum in my possession, really there are so many
dishonest people nowadays! As for papers, that's quite another thing;
I'll willingly take charge of as many papers as you please, but money is
such a dangerous thing!"

"Perhaps you are right; then I tell you what we will do--eh, neighbour?
I will be banker, and undertake the responsibility of guarding this
money. Should Germain require anything, you can let me know; I will
leave you my address, and whatever you send for shall be punctually and
faithfully sent."

"Oh, dear, yes, that will be very much better! How good of you to offer,
for I could not have ventured to propose such a thing to you! So that is
settled; I will beg of you, also, to take whatever this furniture sells
for. And now let us see about the papers," continued Rigolette, opening
the bureau and pulling out several drawers. "Ah, I dare say this is it!
See what a large packet! But, oh, good gracious, M. Rodolph, do pray
look what mournful words these are written on the outside!"

And here Rigolette, in a faltering voice, read as follows:

"'In the event of my dying by either a violent or natural death, I
request whoever may open this bureau to carry these papers to Mlle.
Rigolette, dressmaker, No. 17 Rue du Temple.' Do you think, M. Rodolph,
that I may break the seals of the envelope?"

"Undoubtedly; does not Germain expressly say that among the papers you
will find a letter particularly addressed to yourself?"

The agitated girl broke the seals which secured the outward cover, and
from it fell a quantity of papers, one of which, bearing the
superscription of Mlle. Rigolette, contained these words:

      "MADEMOISELLE:--When this letter reaches your hands, I shall
    be no more, if, as I fear, I should perish by a violent death,
    through falling into a snare similar to that from which I lately
    escaped. A few particulars herein enclosed, and entitled 'Notes
    on My Life,' may serve to discover my murderers."

"Ah, M. Rodolph," cried Rigolette, interrupting herself, "I am no longer
astonished poor Germain was so melancholy! How very dreadful to be
continually pursued by such ideas!"

"He must, indeed, have suffered deeply; but, trust me, his worst
misfortunes are over."

"Alas, M. Rodolph, I trust it may prove so! Still, to be in prison, and
accused of theft!"

"Make yourself quite easy about him; his innocence once proved, instead
of returning to his former seclusion and loneliness, he will regain his
friends. You, first and foremost, and then a dearly loved mother, from
whom he has been separated from his childhood."

"His mother! Has he, then, still a mother?"

"He has, but she has long believed him lost to her for ever. Imagine her
delight at seeing him again, cleared from the unworthy charge now
brought against him. You see I was right in saying that his greatest
troubles were over; do not mention his mother to him. I entrust you with
the secret, because you take so generous an interest in the fate of
Germain that it is but due to your devotedness that you should be
tranquillised as to his future fate."

"Oh, thank you, M. Rodolph! I promise you to guard the secret as
carefully as you could do."

Rigolette then proceeded with the perusal of Germain's letter; it
continued thus:

    "'Should you deign, mademoiselle, to cast your eyes over these
    notes, you will find that I have been unfortunate all my life,
    always unhappy, except during the hours I have passed with you;
    you will find sentiments I should never have ventured to express
    by words fully revealed in a sort of memorandum, entitled "My
    Only Days of Happiness." Nearly every evening, after quitting
    you, I thus poured forth the cheering thoughts with which your
    affection inspired me, and which only sweetened the bitterness
    of a cup full even to overflowing. That which was but friendship
    in you, was, in my breast, the purest, the sincerest love; but
    of that love I have never spoken. No, I reserved its full
    disclosure till the moment should arrive when I could be but as
    an object of your sorrowing recollection. No, never would I have
    sought to involve you in a destiny as thoroughly miserable as my
    own. But, when your eye peruses these pages, there will be
    nothing to fear from the power of my ill-starred fate. I shall
    have been your faithful friend, your adoring lover, but I shall
    no longer be dangerous to your future happiness in either sense.
    I have but one last wish and desire, and I trust that you will
    kindly accomplish it. I have witnessed the noble courage with
    which you labour day by day, as well as the care and management
    requisite to make your hard-earned gain suffice for your
    moderate wants. Often have I shuddered at the bare idea of your
    being reduced by illness (brought on, probably, by overattention
    to your work) to a state too frightful to dwell upon. And it is
    no small consolation to me to believe it in my power to spare
    you, not only a considerable share of personal inconvenience,
    but also to preserve you from evils your unsuspicious nature
    dreams not of.'

"What does that last part mean, M. Rodolph?" asked Rigolette, much
surprised.

"Proceed with the letter; we shall see by and by."

Rigolette thus resumed:

    "'I know upon how little you can live, and of what service even
    a small sum would be to you in any case of emergency. I am very
    poor myself, but still, by dint of rigid economy, I have managed
    to save fifteen hundred francs, which are placed in the hands of
    a banker; it is all I am worth in the world, but by my will,
    which you will find with this, I have ventured to bequeath it to
    you; and I trust you will not refuse to accept this last proof
    of the sincere affection of a friend and brother, from whom
    death will have separated you when this meets your eye.'

"Oh, M. Rodolph," cried Rigolette, bursting into tears, "this is too
much! Kind, good Germain, thus to consider my future welfare! What an
excellent heart he must have!"

"Worthy and noble-minded young man!" rejoined Rodolph, with deep
emotion. "But calm yourself, my good girl. Thank God, Germain is still
living! And, by anticipating the perusal of his last wishes, you will at
least have learned how sincerely he loved you,--nay, still loves you!"

"And only to think," said Rigolette, drying up her tears, "that I should
never once have suspected it! When first I knew M. Girandeau and M.
Cabrion, they were always talking to me of their violent love, and
flames, and darts, and such stuff; but finding I took no notice of them,
they left off wearying me with such nonsense. Now, on the contrary,
Germain never named love to me. When I proposed to him that we should be
good friends, he accepted the offer as frankly as it was made, and ever
after that we were always excellent companions and neighbours; but--now
I don't mind telling you, M. Rodolph, that I was not sorry Germain never
talked to me in the same silly strain."

"But still it astonished you, did it not?"

"Why, M. Rodolph, I ascribed it to his melancholy, and I fancied his low
spirits prevented his joking like the others."

"And you felt angry with him, did you not, for always being so sad?"

"No," said the grisette, ingenuously; "no, I excused him, because it was
the only fault he had. But now that I have read his kind and feeling
letter, I cannot forgive myself for ever having blamed him even for that
one thing."

"In the first place," said Rodolph, smiling, "you find that he had many
and just causes for his sadness; and secondly, that, spite of his
melancholy, he did love you deeply and sincerely."

"To be sure; and it seems a thing to be proud of, to be loved by so
excellent a young man!"

"Whose love you will, no doubt, return one of these days?"

"I don't know about that, M. Rodolph, though it is very likely, for poor
Germain is so much to be pitied. I can imagine myself in his place.
Suppose, just when I fancied myself despised and forsaken by all the
world, some one whom I loved very dearly should evince for me more
regard than I had ventured to hope for, don't you think it would make me
very happy?" Then, after a short silence, Rigolette continued, with a
sigh, "On the other hand, we are both so poor that, perhaps, it would
be very imprudent. Ah, well, M. Rodolph, I must not think of such
things. Perhaps, too, I deceive myself. One thing, however, is quite
sure, and that is, that so long as Germain remains in prison I will do
all in my power for him. It will be time enough when he has regained his
liberty for me to determine whether 'tis love or friendship I feel for
him. Until then it would only torment me needlessly to try to make up my
mind what I had better do. But it is getting late, M. Rodolph. Will you
have the goodness to collect all those papers, while I make up a parcel
of linen? Ah, I forgot the little bag containing the little
orange-coloured cravat I gave him. No doubt it is here--in this drawer.
Oh, yes, this is it. Oh, see, what a pretty bag! How nicely embroidered!
Poor Germain! I declare he has kept such a trifle as this little
handkerchief with as much care as though it had been some holy relic. I
well remember the last time I had it around my throat; and when I gave
it to him, poor fellow, how very pleased he was!"

At this moment some one knocked at the door.

"Who's there?" inquired Rodolph.

"Want to speak to Ma'am Mathieu," replied a harsh, hoarse voice, and in
a tone which is peculiar to the lowest orders. (Madame Mathieu was the
matcher of precious stones to whom we have before referred.)

This voice, whose accent was peculiar, awoke some vague recollections in
Rodolph's breast; and, desirous of elucidating them, he took the light,
and went himself to open the door. He found himself confronted by a man
who was one of the frequenters of the _tapis-franc_ of the ogress, and
recognised him instantly, so deeply was the print of vice stamped upon
him, so completely marked on his beardless and youthful features. It was
Barbillon.

Barbillon, the pretended hackney-coachman, who had driven the
Schoolmaster and the Chouette to the hollow way of Bouqueval,--Barbillon,
the assassin of the husband of the unhappy milkwoman, who had set the
labourers of the farm at Arnouville on against La Goualeuse. Whether
this wretch had forgotten Rodolph's face, which he had never seen but
once at the _tapis-franc_ of the ogress, or that the change of dress
prevented him from recognising the Chourineur's conqueror, he did not
evince the slightest surprise at his appearance.

"What do you want?" inquired Rodolph.

"Here's a letter for Ma'am Mathieu, and I must give it to her myself,"
was Barbillon's reply.

"She does not live here,--it's opposite," said Rodolph.

"Thank ye, master. They told me the left-hand door; but I've mistook."

Rodolph did not recollect the name of the diamond-matcher, which Morel
the lapidary had only mentioned once or twice, and thus had no motive
for interesting himself in the female to whom Barbillon came with his
message; but yet, although ignorant of the ruffian's crimes, his face
was so decidedly repulsive that he remained at the threshold of the
door, curious to see the person to whom Barbillon brought the letter.

Barbillon had scarcely knocked at the door opposite to Germain's, than
it opened, and the jewel-matcher, a stout woman of about fifty, appeared
with a candle in her hand.

"Ma'am Mathieu?" inquired Barbillon.

"That's me, my man."

"Here's a letter, and I waits for an answer."

And Barbillon made a step forward to enter the doorway, but the woman
made him a sign to remain where he was, and unsealed the letter, which
she read by the light of the candle she held, and then replied with an
air of satisfaction:

"Say it's all right, my man, and I will bring what is required. I will
be there at the same hour as usual. My respects to the lady."

"Yes, missus. Please to remember the porter!"

"Oh, you must ask them as sent you; they are richer than I am." And she
shut the door.

Rodolph returned to Germain's room, when he saw Barbillon run quickly
down the staircase. The ruffian found on the boulevard a man of
low-lived, brutal appearance, waiting for him in front of a shop.
Although the passers-by could hear (it is true they could not
comprehend), Barbillon appeared so delighted that he could not help
saying to his companion:

"Come and 'lush a drain of red tape,' Nicholas; the old mot swallows the
bait, hook and all. She'll show at the Chouette's. Old Mother Martial
will lend a hand to peel her of the swag, and a'terwards we can box the
'cold meat' in your 'barkey.'"[2]

  [2] "Come and let's have some brandy together, Nicholas. The
  old woman falls easily into the snare. She will come to the
  Chouette's; Mother Martial will help us to take her jewels from
  her forcibly, and then we can remove the dead body away in your
  boat."

"Let's mizzle,[3] then; for I must get back to Asnières early, or else
my brother Martial will smell summut."

  [3] "Let's be quick, then."

And the two robbers, after having exchanged these words in their own
slang, went towards the Rue St. Denis.

       *       *       *       *       *

Some minutes afterwards Rigolette and Rodolph left Germain's, got into
the hackney-coach, and reached the Rue du Temple.

The coach stopped.

At the moment when the door opened, Rodolph recognised by the light of
the dram-shop lamps his faithful Murphy, who was waiting for him at the
door of the entrance.

The squire's presence always announced some serious and sudden event,
for it was he alone who knew at all times where to find the prince.

"What's the matter?" inquired Rodolph, quickly, whilst Rigolette was
collecting several things out of the vehicle.

"A terrible circumstance, monseigneur!"

"Speak, in heaven's name!"

"M. the Marquis d'Harville--"

"You alarm me!"

"Had several friends to breakfast with him this morning. He was in high
spirits, had never been more joyous, when a fatal imprudence--"

"Pray come to the point--pray!"

"And playing with a pistol, which he did not believe to be loaded--"

"Wounded himself seriously."

"Monseigneur!"

"Well?"

"Something dreadful!"

"What do you mean?"

"He is dead!"

"D'Harville! Ah, how horrible!" exclaimed Rodolph, in a tone so agonised
that Rigolette, who was at the moment quitting the coach with the
parcels, said:

"Alas! what ails you, M. Rodolph?"

"Some very distressing information I have just told my friend,
mademoiselle," said Murphy to the young girl, for the prince was so
overcome that he could not reply.

"Is it, then, some dreadful misfortune?" said Rigolette, trembling all
over.

"Very dreadful, indeed!" replied the squire.

"Yes, most awful!" said Rodolph, after a few moment's silence; then
recollecting Rigolette, he said to her, "Excuse me, my dear neighbour,
if I do not go up to your room with you. To-morrow I will send you my
address, and an order to go to see Germain in his prison. I will soon
see you again."

"Ah, M. Rodolph, I assure you that I share in the grief you now
experience! I thank you very much for having accompanied me; but I
shall soon see you again, sha'n't I?"

"Yes, my child, very soon."

"Good evening, M. Rodolph," added Rigolette, and then disappeared down
the passage with the various things she had brought away from Germain's
room.

The prince and Murphy got into the hackney-coach, which took them to the
Rue Plumet. Rodolph immediately wrote the following note to Clémence:

      "MADAME:--I have this instant learned the sudden blow which has
    struck you, and deprived me of one of my best friends. I forbear
    any attempt to portray my horror and my regret. Yet I must
    mention to you certain circumstances unconnected with this cruel
    event. I have just learned that your stepmother, who has been,
    no doubt, in Paris for several days, returns this evening to
    Normandy, taking with her Polidori. No doubt but this fact will
    convince you of the peril which threatens your father; and pray
    allow me to give you some advice, which I think requisite. After
    the appalling event of this morning, every one must but too
    easily conceive your anxiety to quit Paris for some time; go,
    therefore, go at once, to Aubiers, so that you may arrive there
    before your stepmother, or, at least, as soon as she. Make
    yourself easy, madame, for I shall watch at a distance, as well
    as close, the abominable projects of your stepmother. Adieu,
    madame; I write these few lines to you in great haste. My heart
    is lacerated when I remember yesterday evening, when I left
    him,--him,--more tranquil and more happy than he had been for a
    very long time.

      "Believe, madame, in my deep and lasting devotion,

                                                    "RODOLPH."

Following the prince's advice, three hours after she had received this
letter, Madame d'Harville, accompanied by her daughter, was on the road
to Normandy. A post-chaise, despatched from Rodolph's mansion, followed
in the same route. Unfortunately, in the troubled state into which this
complication of events and the hurry of her departure had driven her,
Clémence had forgotten to inform the prince that she had met
Fleur-de-Marie at St. Lazare.

Our readers may, perhaps, remember that, on the previous evening, the
Chouette had been menacing Madame Séraphin, and threatening to unfold
the whole history of La Goualeuse's existence, affirming that she knew
(and she spoke truth) where the young girl then was. The reader may also
recollect that, after this conversation, the notary, Jacques Ferrand,
dreading the disclosure of his criminal course, believed that he had a
strong motive for effecting the disappearance of La Goualeuse, whose
existence, once known, would compromise him fatally. He had, in
consequence, written to Bradamanti, one of his accomplices, to come to
him that they might together arrange a fresh plot, of which
Fleur-de-Marie was to be the victim. Bradamanti, occupied by the no less
pressing interests of Madame d'Harville's stepmother, who had her own
sinister motives for taking the charlatan with her to M. d'Orbigny,
finding it, no doubt, more profitable to serve his ancient female ally,
did not attend to the notary's appointment, but set out for Normandy
without seeing Madame Séraphin.

The storm was gathering over the head of Jacques Ferrand. During the day
the Chouette had returned to reiterate her threats; and to prove that
they were not vain, she declared to the notary that the little girl,
formerly abandoned by Madame Séraphin, was then a prisoner in St.
Lazare, under the name of La Goualeuse; and that if he did not give ten
thousand francs (400_l._) in three days, this young girl would receive
the papers which belonged to her, and which would instruct her that she
had been confided in her infancy to the care of Jacques Ferrand.
According to his custom, the notary denied all boldly, and drove the
Chouette away as an impudent liar, although he was perfectly convinced,
and greatly alarmed at the dangerous drift of her threats. Thanks to his
numerous connections, the notary found means to ascertain that very day
(during the conversation of Fleur-de-Marie and Madame d'Harville) that
La Goualeuse was actually a prisoner in St. Lazare, and so marked for
her good conduct that they were expecting her discharge every moment.
Thus informed, Jacques Ferrand, having determined on his deadly scheme,
felt that, in order to carry it into execution, Bradamanti's help was
more than ever indispensable; and thereon came Madame Séraphin's vain
attempts to see the doctor. Having at length heard, in the evening, of
the departure of the charlatan, the notary, driven to act by the
imminence of his fears and danger, recalled to mind the Martial family,
those freshwater pirates established near the bridge of Asnières, with
whom Bradamanti had proposed to place Louise, in order to get rid of her
undetected. Having absolutely need of an accomplice to carry out his
deadly purposes against Fleur-de-Marie, the notary took every precaution
not to be compromised in case a fresh crime should be committed; and,
the day after Bradamanti's departure for Normandy, Madame Séraphin went
with all speed to the Martials.




CHAPTER III.

L'ILE DU RAVAGEUR.


The following scenes took place during the evening of the day in which
Madame Séraphin, in compliance with Jacques Ferrand the notary's orders,
went to the Martials, the freshwater pirates established at the point of
a small islet of the Seine, not far from the bridge of Asnières.

The Father Martial had died, like his own father, on the scaffold,
leaving a widow, four sons, and two daughters. The second of these sons
was already condemned to the galleys for life, and of the rest of this
numerous family there remained in the Ile du Ravageur (a name which was
popularly given to this place; why, we will hereafter explain) the
Mother Martial; three sons, the eldest (La Louve's lover) twenty-five
years of age, the next twenty, and the youngest twelve; two girls, one
eighteen years of age, the second nine.

The examples of such families, in whom there is perpetuated a sort of
fearful inheritance of crime, are but too frequent. And this must be so.
Let us repeat, unceasingly, society thinks of punishing, but never of
preventing, crime. A criminal is sentenced to the galleys for life;
another is executed. These felons will leave young families; does
society take any care or heed of these orphans,--these orphans, whom it
has made so, by visiting their father with a civil death, or cutting off
his head? Does it substitute any careful or preserving guardianship
after the removal of him whom the law has declared to be unworthy,
infamous,--after the removal of him whom the law has put to death? No;
"the poison dies with the beast," says society. It is deceived; the
poison of corruption is so subtle, so corrosive, so contagious, that it
becomes almost invariably hereditary; but, if counteracted in time, it
would never be incurable. Strange contradiction! Dissection proves that
a man dies of a malady that may be transmitted, and then, by
precautionary measures, his descendants are preserved from the affection
of which he has been the victim. Let the same facts be produced in the
moral order of things; let it be demonstrated that a criminal almost
always bequeaths to his son the germ of a precocious depravity. Will
society do for the safety of this young soul what the doctor does for
the body, when it is a question of contending against hereditary
vitiation? No; instead of curing this unhappy creature, we leave him to
be gangrened, even to death; and then, in the same way as the people
believe the son of the executioner to be an executioner, perforce, also,
they will believe the son of a criminal also a criminal. And then we
consider that the result of an inheritance inexorably fatal, which is
really a corruption caused by the egotistical neglect of society. Thus,
if, in spite of the evil mark on his name, the orphan, whom the law has
made so, remains, by chance, industrious and honest, a barbarous
prejudice will still reflect on him his father's offences; and thus
subjected to undeserved reprobation, he will scarcely find employment.
And, instead of coming to his aid, to save him from discouragement,
despair, and, above all, the dangerous resentments of injustice, which
sometimes drive the most generous disposition to revolt to ill, society
will say:

"Let him go wrong if he will,--we shall watch him. Have we not gaolers,
turnkeys, and executioners?"

Thus for him who (and it is as rare as it is meritorious) preserves
himself pure in spite of the worst examples, is there any support, any
encouragement? Thus for him who, plunged from his birth in a focus of
domestic depravity, is vitiated quite young, what hope is there of cure?

"Yes, yes, I will cure him, the orphan I have made," replies society;
"but in my own way,--by and by. To extirpate the smallpox, to cut out
the imposthume, it must come to a head."

A criminal desires to speak.

"Prisons and galleys, they are my hospitals. In incurable cases there is
the executioner. As to the cure of my orphan," adds society, "I will
reflect upon it. Let the germ of hereditary corruption ripen; let it
increase; let it extend its ravages far and wide. When our man shall be
rotten to the heart, when crime oozes out of him at every pore, when a
robbery or desperate murder shall have placed him at the same bar of
infamy at which his father stood, then we will cure this inheritor of
crime,--as we cured his progenitor. At the galleys or on the scaffold
the son will find his father's seat still warm."

Society thus reasons; and it is astonished, and indignant, and
frightened, to see how robberies and murders are handed down so fatally
from generation to generation.

The dark picture which is now to follow--The Freshwater Pirates--is
intended to display what the inheritance of evil in a family may be when
society does not come legally or officially to preserve the unfortunate
victims of the law from the terrible consequences of the sentence
executed against the father.[4]

  [4] In proportion as we advance in this work, its moral aim is
  attacked with so much bitterness, and, as we think, with so much
  injustice, that we ask permission to dwell a little on the
  serious and honourable idea which hitherto has sustained and
  guided us. Many serious, delicate, and lofty minds, being
  desirous of encouraging us in our endeavours, and having
  forwarded to us the flattering testimonials of their approval, it
  is due, perhaps, to these known and unknown friends to reply over
  again to the blind accusations which have reached, we may say,
  even to the bosom of the legislative assembly. To proclaim the
  odious immorality of our work is to proclaim decidedly, it
  appears to us, the odiously immoral tendencies of the persons who
  honour us with the deepest sympathies. It is in the name of these
  sympathies, as well as in our own, that we shall endeavour to
  prove, by an example selected from amongst others, that this work
  is not altogether destitute of generous and practical ideas. We
  gave, some time back, the sketch of a model farm founded by
  Rodolph, in order to encourage, teach, and remunerate poor,
  honest, and industrious labourers. We add to this: Honest men who
  are unfortunate deserve, at least, as much interest as criminals;
  yet there are numerous associations intended for the patronage of
  young prisoners, or those discharged, but there is no society
  founded for the purpose of giving succour to poor young persons
  whose conduct has been invariably exemplary. So that it is
  absolutely necessary to have committed an offence to become
  qualified for these institutions, which are, unquestionably, most
  meritorious and salutary. And we make a peasant of the Bouqueval
  farm to say:

  "It is humane and charitable not to make the wicked desperate,
  but it is also requisite that the good should not be without
  hope. If a stout, sturdy, honest fellow, desirous of doing well,
  and of learning all he can, were to present himself at the farm
  for young ex-thieves, they would say to him, 'My lad, haven't you
  stolen some trifle, or been somewhat dissolute?' 'No!' 'Well,
  then, this is no place for you.'"

  This discordance of things had struck minds much superior to our
  own, and, thanks to them, what we considered as an utopianism was
  realised. Under the superintendence of one of the most
  distinguished and most honourable men of the age, M. le Comte
  Portalis, and under the able direction of a real philanthropist
  with a generous heart and an enlightened and practical mind, M.
  Allier, a society has been established for the purpose of
  succouring poor and honest persons of the Department of the
  Seine, and of employing them in agricultural colonies. This
  single and sole result is sufficient to affirm the moral idea of
  our work. We are very proud and very happy to have been met in
  the midst of our ideas, our wishes, and our hopes by the founders
  of this new work of charity; for we are one of the most obscure,
  but most convinced, propagators of these two great truths,--that
  it is the duty of society to prevent evil, and to encourage and
  recompense good, as much as in it lies.

  Whilst we are speaking of this new work of charity, whose just
  and moral idea ought to have a salutary and fruitful result, let
  us hope that its founders will perchance think of supplying
  another vacancy, by extending hereafter their tutelary patronage,
  or, at least, their solicitude, over young children whose fathers
  have been executed, or condemned to an infamous sentence
  involving civil death, and who, we will repeat, are made orphans
  by the act and operation of the law. Such of these unfortunate
  children as shall be already worthy of interest from their
  wholesome tendencies and their misery will still more deserve
  particular notice, in consequence of their painful, difficult,
  and dangerous position. Let us add: The family of a condemned
  criminal, almost always victims of cruel repulses, apply in vain
  for labour, and are compelled, in order to escape universal
  reprobation, to fly from the spot where they have hitherto found
  work. Then, exasperated and enraged by injustice, already branded
  as criminals, for faults of which they are innocent, frequently
  at the end of all honourable resource, these unfortunates would
  sink and die of famine if they remained honest. If they have, on
  the other hand, already undergone an almost inevitable
  corruption, ought we not to try and rescue them whilst there is
  yet time? The presence of these orphans of the law in the midst
  of other children protected by the society of whom we have
  spoken, would be, moreover, a useful example to all. It would
  show that if the guilty is unfailingly punished, his family lose
  nothing, but rather gain in the esteem of the world, if by dint
  of courage and virtues they achieve the reëstablishing of a
  tarnished name. Shall we say that the legislature desires to
  render the chastisement still more terrible by virtually striking
  the criminal father in the fortune of his innocent son? That
  would be barbarous, immoral, irrational. Is it not, on the
  contrary, of the highest moral consequence to prove to the people
  that there is no hereditary succession of evil; that the original
  stain is not ineffaceable?

  Let us venture to hope that these reflections will appear
  deserving of some attention from the new Society of Patronage.
  Unquestionably it is painful to think that the state never takes
  the initiative in these questions so vital and so deeply
  interesting to social organisation.

The ancestor of the Martial family who first established himself on this
islet, on payment of a moderate rent, was a _ravageur_ (a
river-scavenger). The ravageurs, as well as the _débardeurs_ and
_déchireurs_ of boats, remain nearly the whole of the day plunged in
water up to the waist in the exercise of their trade. The _débardeurs_
bring ashore the floating wood. The _déchireurs_ break up the rafts
which have brought the wood. Equally aquatic as these other two
occupations, the business of a _ravageur_ is different. Going into the
water as far as possible, the _ravageur_, or mud-lark, draws up, by aid
of a long drag, the river sand from beneath the mud; then, collecting it
in large wooden bowls, he washes it like a person washing for gold dust,
and extracts from it metallic particles of all kinds,--iron, copper,
lead, tin, pewter, brass,--the results of the relics of all sorts of
utensils. The _ravageurs_, indeed, often find in the sand fragments of
gold and silver jewelry, brought into the Seine either by the sewers
which are washed by the stream, or by the masses of snow or ice
collected in the streets, and which are cast into the river. We do not
know by what tradition or custom these persons, usually honest and
industrious, are called by a name so formidable. Martial, the father,
the first inhabitant of this islet, being a _ravageur_ (and a sad
exception to his comrades), the inhabitants of the river's banks called
it the Ile du Ravageur.

The dwelling of these freshwater pirates was placed at the southern end
of the island. In daytime there was visible, on a sign-board over the
door:

         "AU RENDEZVOUS DES RAVAGEURS.
      GOOD WINE, GOOD EELS, AND FRIED FISH.
         BOATS LET BY THE DAY OR HOUR."

We thus see that the head of this depraved family added to his visible
or hidden pursuits those of a public-house keeper, fisherman, and
letter of boats. The felon's widow continued to keep the house, and
reprobates, vagrants, escaped convicts, wandering wild-beast showmen,
and scamps of every description came there to pass Sundays and other
days not marked with a red letter in the calendar, in parties of
pleasure. Martial (La Louve's lover), the eldest son of the family, the
least guilty of all the family, was a river poacher, and now and then,
as a real champion, and for money paid, took the part of the weak
against the strong. One of his brothers, Nicholas, the intended
accomplice of Barbillon in the murder of the jewel-matcher, was in
appearance a _ravageur_, but really a freshwater pirate in the Seine and
its banks. François, the youngest son of the executed felon, rowed
visitors who wished to go on the river in a boat. We have alluded to
Ambroise Martial, condemned to the galleys for burglary at night with
attempt to murder. The eldest daughter, nicknamed Calabash
(_Calebasse_), helped her mother in the kitchen, and waited on the
company. Her sister, Amandine, nine years of age, was also employed in
the house according to her years and strength.

At the period in question it was a dull night out of doors; heavy, gray,
opaque clouds, driven by the wind, showed here and there in the midst of
their openings a few patches of dark blue spotted with stars. The
outline of the islet, bordered by high and ragged poplars, was strongly
and darkly defined in the clear haze of the sky and in the white
transparency of the river. The house, with its irregular gables, was
completely buried in the shade; two windows in the ground floor only
were lighted, and these windows showed a deep red light, which was
reflected like long trails of fire in the little ripples which washed
the landing-place close to the house. The chains of the boats which were
moored there made a continual clashing, that mingled unpleasantly with
the gusts of the wind in the branches of the poplars, and the hoarse
murmurs of the main stream.

A portion of the family was assembled in the kitchen of the house. This
was a large low-roofed apartment. Facing the door were two windows,
under which a long stove extended. To the left hand there was a high
chimney; on the right a staircase leading to the upper story. At the
side of this staircase was the entrance to a large room, containing
several tables for the use of the guests at the cabaret. The light of a
lamp, joined to the flame of the fire, was strongly reflected by a
number of saucepans and other copper utensils suspended against the
wall, or ranged on shelves with a quantity of earthenware; and a large
table stood in the middle of the kitchen. The felon's widow, with three
of her children, was seated in the corner near the fireplace.

This woman, tall and meagre, seemed about five and forty years of age.
She was dressed in black, with a mourning handkerchief tied about her
head, concealing her hair, and surrounding her flat, livid, and wrinkled
brows; her nose was long and straight; her cheek-bones prominent; her
cheeks furrowed; her complexion bilious and sallow; the corners of her
mouth, always curved downwards, rendered still harsher the expression of
her countenance, as chilling, sinister, and immovable as a marble mask.
Her gray eyebrows surmounted her dull blue eyes.

The felon's widow was employed with needlework, as well as her two
daughters. The eldest girl was tall and forbidding like her mother, with
her features, calm, harsh, and repulsive, her thin nose, her ill-formed
mouth, and her pale look. Her yellow complexion, which resembled a ripe
quince, had procured for her the name of Calabash (_Calebasse_). She was
not in mourning, but wore a brown gown, whilst a cap of black tulle did
not conceal two bands of scanty hair of dull and dingy light brown.

François, the youngest of the Martial sons, was sitting on a low stool
repairing an _aldrel_, a thin-meshed net forbidden to be used on the
Seine. In spite of the tan of his features, this boy seemed in perfect
health; a forest of red hair covered his head; his face was round, his
lips thick, his forehead projecting, his eyes quick and piercing. He was
not like his mother or his elder sister, but had a subdued and sly look,
as from time to time, through the thick mass of hair that fell over his
eyes, he threw a stealthy and fearful glance at his mother, or exchanged
a look of intelligence and affection with his little sister, Amandine.

The latter was seated beside her brother, and was occupied, not in
marking, but in unmarking, some linen stolen on the previous evening.
She was nine years old, and was as like her brother as her sister was
like her mother. Her features, without being more regular, were less
coarse than those of François. Although covered with freckles, her
complexion was remarkably clear, her lips thick and red, her hair also
red, but silky, and her eyes, though small, were of a clear bright blue.
When Amandine's look met that of her brother, she turned a glance
towards the door, and then François replied by sigh; after which,
calling his sister's attention by a slight gesture, he counted with the
end of his needle ten loops of the net. This was meant to imply, in the
symbolical language of children, that their brother Martial would not
return until ten o'clock that evening.

Seeing these two women so silent and ill-looking, and the two poor
little mute, frightened, uneasy children, we might suppose they were two
executioners and two victims. Calabash, perceiving that Amandine had
ceased from her occupation for a moment, said, in a harsh tone:

"Come, haven't you done taking the mark out of that shirt?"

The little girl bowed her head without making any reply, and, by the aid
of her fingers and scissors, hastily finished taking out the red cotton
threads which marked the letters in the linen.

After a few minutes Amandine, addressing the widow timidly, showed her
the shirt, and said:

"Mother, I have done it."

Without making any reply, the widow threw her another piece of linen.
The child did not catch it quickly enough, and it fell on the ground.
Her tall sister gave her, with her hand as hard as wood, a sharp slap on
the arm, saying:

"You stupid brat!"

Amandine resumed her seat, and set to work actively, after having
exchanged with her brother a glance of her eye, into which a tear had
started.

The same silence continued to reign in the kitchen. Without, the wind
still moaned and dashed about the sign in front of the house. This
dismal creaking, and the dull boiling of a pot placed over the fire,
were the only sounds that were heard. The two children observed, with
secret fright, that their mother did not speak. Although she was
habitually taciturn, this complete silence, and a certain drawing in of
the lips, announced to them that the widow was in what they called her
white passion, that is to say, was a prey to concentrated irritation.

The fire was going out for want of fuel.

"François, a log," said Calabash.

The young mender of forbidden nets looked into a nook beside the
chimney, and replied:

"There are no more there."

"Then go to the wood-pile," said Calabash.

François murmured some unintelligible words, but did not stir.

"Do you hear me, François?" inquired Calabash, harshly.

The felon's widow laid on her knees a towel she was also unmarking, and
looked at her son. He had lowered his head, but he guessed he felt, if
we may use the expression, the fierce look his mother cast upon him,
and, fearful of encountering her dreaded countenance, the boy remained
without stirring.

"I say, are you deaf, François?" said Calabash, in an irritated tone.
"Mother, you see!"

The tall sister seemed to be happy in finding fault with the two
children, and to seek for them the punishment which the widow pitilessly
inflicted. Amandine, without being observed, gently touched her
brother's elbow, to make him quietly do what Calabash desired. François
did not stir. The elder sister still looked at her mother as demanding
the punishment of the offender, and the widow understood her. With her
long lean finger she pointed to a stick of stout and pliant willow
placed in a recess near the chimney. Calabash stooped forward, took up
this staff of chastisement, and handed it to her mother. François had
seen his mother's gesture, and, rising suddenly, sprung out of the reach
of the threatening stick.

"Do you want mother to break your back?" exclaimed Calabash.

The widow, still holding the willow stick in her hand, pinching her pale
lips together more and more, looked at François with a fixed eye, but
without uttering a syllable. By the slight tremor of Amandine's hands,
with her head bent downwards, and the redness which suddenly overspread
her neck, it was easy to see that the child, although habituated to such
scenes, was alarmed at the fate that threatened her brother, who had
taken refuge in a corner of the kitchen, and seemed frightened and
irritated.

"Mind yourself, mother's going to begin, and then it will be too late!"
said the tall sister.

"I don't care!" replied François, turning pale. "I'd rather be beaten as
I was the day before yesterday, than--go to the wood-pile--and at
night--again."

"And why?" asked Calabash, impatiently.

"I am--afraid of the wood-pile--I--" answered the boy, shuddering as he
spoke.

"Afraid--you stupid! And of what?"

François shook his head, but did not reply.

"Will you answer? What are you afraid of?"

"I don't know. But I am frightened."

"Why, you've been there a hundred times, and last night, too."

"I won't go there any more."

"Mother's going to begin."

"So much the worse for me," exclaimed the lad. "But she may beat me,
kill me, and I'll not go near the wood-pile--not at night."

"Once more--why not?" inquired Calabash.

"Why, because--"

"Because--?"

"Because there's some one--"

"There's some one--"

"Buried there!" said François, with a shudder.

The felon's widow, in spite of her impassiveness, could not repress a
sudden start; her daughter did the same. It seemed as though the two
women were struck with an electric shock.

"Some one buried by the wood-pile?" said Calabash, shrugging her
shoulders.

"I tell you that just now, whilst I was piling up some wood, I saw in a
dark corner near the wood-pile a dead man's bone; it was sticking a
little way out of the ground where it was damp, just by the corner,"
added François.

"Do you hear him, mother? Why, the boy's a fool!" said Calabash, making
a signal to the widow. "They are mutton-bones I put there for
washing-lye."

"It was not a mutton-bone," replied the boy, with alarm, "it was a dead
person's bones,--a dead man's bones. I saw quite plainly a foot that
stuck out of the ground."

"And, of course, you told your brother, your dear friend Martial, of
your grand discovery, didn't you?" asked Calabash, with brutal irony.

François made no reply.

"Nasty little spy!" said Calabash, savagely; "because he is as cowardly
as a cur, and would as soon see us scragged, as our father was scragged
before us."

"If you call me a spy, I'll tell my brother Martial everything!" said
François, much enraged. "I haven't told him yet, for I haven't seen him
since; but, when he comes here this evening, I'll--"

The child could not finish; his mother came up to him, calm and
inexorable as ever. Although she habitually stooped a little, her figure
was still tall for a woman. Holding the willow wand in one hand, with
the other the widow took her son by the arm, and, in spite of alarm,
resistance, prayers, and tears of the child, she dragged him after her,
and made him ascend the staircase at the further end of the kitchen.
After a moment's interval, there was heard heavy trampling, mingled with
cries and sobs. Some minutes afterwards this noise ceased. A door shut
violently; the felon's widow descended. Then, as impassive as ever, she
put the stick in its usual place, seated herself close to the fireplace,
and resumed her occupation, without saying a word.




CHAPTER IV.

THE FRESHWATER PIRATE.


After a silence of several minutes, the criminal's widow said to her
daughter:

"Go and get some wood; we will set the wood-pile to rights when Nicholas
and Martial return home this evening."

"Martial! Do you mean to tell him also that--"

"The wood, I say!" repeated the widow, abruptly interrupting her
daughter, who, accustomed to yield to the imperious and iron rule of her
mother, lighted a lantern, and went out.

During the preceding scene, Amandine, deeply disquieted concerning the
fate of François, whom she tenderly loved, had not ventured either to
lift up her eyes, or dry her tears, which fell, drop by drop, on to her
lap. Her sobs, which she dared not give utterance to, almost suffocated
her, and she strove even to repress the fearful beatings of her heart.
Blinded by her fast gathering tears, she sought to conceal her emotion
by endeavouring to pick the mark from the chemise given to her, but,
from the nervous trembling of her hand, she ran the scissors into her
finger sufficiently deep to cause considerable effusion of blood; but
the poor child thought much less of the pain she experienced than of the
certain punishment which awaited her for staining the linen with her
blood. Happily for her, the widow was too deeply absorbed in profound
reflection to take any notice of what had occurred. Calabash now
returned, bearing a basket filled with wood. To the inquiring look of
her mother, she returned an affirmative nod of the head, which was
intended to acquaint her with the fact of the dead man's foot being
actually above the ground. The widow compressed her lips, and continued
the work she was occupied upon; the only difference perceptible in her
being that she plied her needle with increased rapidity. Calabash,
meanwhile, renewed the fire, superintended the state of the cookery
progressing in the saucepan beside the hearth, and then resumed her seat
near her mother.

"Nicholas is not here yet," said she to her parent. "It is to be hoped
that the old woman who this morning engaged him to meet a gentleman from
Bradamanti has not led him into any scrape. She had such a very offhand
way with her; she would neither give any explanation as to the nature of
the business Nicholas was wanted for, nor tell her name, or where she
came from."

The widow shrugged her shoulders.

"You do not consider Nicholas is in any danger, I see, mother. And,
after all, I dare say you are quite right! The old woman desired him to
be on the Quai de Billy, opposite the landing-place, about seven o'clock
in the evening, and wait there for a person who wished to speak with
him, and who would utter the word 'Bradamanti' as a sort of countersign.
Certainly there is nothing very perilous in doing so much. No doubt
Nicholas is late from having to-day found, as he did yesterday,
something on the road. Look at this capital linen which he contrived to
filch from a boat, in which a laundress had just left it!" So saying,
she pointed to one of the pieces of linen Amandine was endeavouring to
pick the mark out of. Then, addressing the child, she said, "What do
folks mean when they talk of filching?"

"I believe," answered the frightened child, without venturing to look
up, "it means taking things that are not ours."

"Oh, you little fool! It means stealing, not taking. Do you
understand?--stealing!"

"Thank you, sister!"

"And when one can steal as cleverly as Nicholas, there is no need to
want for anything. Look at that linen he filched yesterday; how
comfortably it set us all up; and that, too, with no other trouble than
just taking out the marks; isn't it true, mother?" added Calabash, with
a burst of laughter, which displayed her decayed and irregular teeth,
yellow and jaundiced as her complexion.

The widow received this pleasantry with cold indifference.

"Talking of fitting ourselves up without any expense," continued
Calabash, "it strikes me we might possibly do so at another shop. You
know quite well that an old man has come, within the last few days, to
live in the country-house belonging to M. Griffon, the doctor of the
hospital at Paris. I mean that lone house about a hundred steps from the
river's side, just opposite the lime-kilns,--eh, mother? You understand
me, don't you?"

The widow bowed her head, in token of assent.

"Well, Nicholas was saying yesterday that it was very likely a good job
might be made out of it," pursued Calabash. "Now I have ascertained,
this very morning, that there is good booty to be found there. The best
way will be to send Amandine to watch the place a little; no one will
take notice of a child like her; and she could pretend to be just
playing about, and amusing herself; all the time she can take notice of
everything, and will be able to tell us all she sees or hears. Do you
hear what I say?" added Calabash, roughly addressing Amandine.

"Yes, sister," answered the trembling child; "I will be sure to do as
you wish me."

"Yes, that is what you always say; but you never do more than promise,
you little slink! That time that I desired you to take a five-franc
piece out of the grocer's till at Asnières, while I managed to keep the
man occupied at the other end of the shop, you did not choose to obey
me; and yet you might have done it so easily; no one ever mistrusts a
child. Pray what was your reason for not doing as you were bid?"

"Because, sister, my heart failed me, and I was afraid."

"And yet, the other day, you took a handkerchief out of the peddler's
pack, when the man was selling his goods inside the public-house. Pray
did he find it out, you silly thing?"

"Oh, but, sister, you know the handkerchief was for you, not me; and you
made me do it. Besides, it was not money."

"What difference does that make?"

"Oh, why, taking a handkerchief is not half so wicked as stealing
money!"

"Upon my word," said Calabash, contemptuously, "these are mighty fine
notions! I suppose it is Martial stuffs your head with all this rubbish.
I suppose you will run open-mouthed to tell him every word we have
said,--eh, little spy? But Lord bless you! We are not afraid of you or
Martial either; you can neither eat us nor drink us, that is one good
thing." Then, addressing herself to the widow, Calabash continued, "I
tell you what, mother, that fellow will get himself into no good by
trying to rule, and domineer, and lay down the law here, as he does;
both Nicholas and myself are determined not to submit to it. He sets
both Amandine and François against everything either you or I order them
to do. Do you think this can last much longer?"

"No!" said the mother, in a harsh, abrupt voice.

"Ever since his Louve has been sent to St. Lazare, Martial has gone on
like a madman, savage as a bear with every one. Pray is it our fault?
Can we help his sweetheart being put in prison? Only let her show her
face here when she comes out, and I'll serve her in such a way she
sha'n't forget one while! I'll match her! I'll--"

Here the widow, who had been buried in profound reflection, suddenly
interrupted her daughter by saying:

"You think something profitable might be got out of the old fellow who
lives in the doctor's house, do you not?"

"Yes, mother!"

"He looks poor and shabby as any common beggar!"

"And, for all that, he is a nobleman."

"A nobleman?"

"True as you're alive! And, what's more, he carries a purse full of
gold, spite of his always going into Paris, and returning, on foot,
leaning on an old stick, just for all the world like a poor wretch that
had not a sou in the world."

"How do you know that he has gold?"

"A little while ago I was at the post-office at Asnières, to inquire
whether there was any letter for us from Toulon--"

At these words, which recalled the circumstance of her son's confinement
in the galleys, the brows of the widow were contracted with a dark
frown, while a half repressed sigh escaped her lips. Unheeding these
signs of perturbation, Calabash proceeded:

"I was waiting my turn, when the old man who lives at the doctor's house
entered the office. I knew him again directly, by his white hair and
beard, his dark complexion, and thick black eyebrows. He does not look
like one that would be easily managed, I can tell you; and, spite of his
age, he has the appearance of a determined old fool that would die
sooner than yield. He walked straight up to the postmistress. 'Pray,'
said he, 'have you any letters from Angers for M. le Comte de Remy?'
'Yes,' replied the woman, 'here is one.' 'Then it is for me,' said the
old man; 'here is my passport.' While the postmistress was examining it,
he drew out a green silk purse, to pay the postage; and, I promise you,
one end was stuffed with gold till it looked as large as an egg. I know
it was gold, for I saw the bright, yellow pieces shining through the
meshes of the purse; and I am quite certain there must have been at
least forty or fifty louis in it!" cried Calabash, her eyes glowing with
a covetous eagerness to possess herself of such a treasure. "And only to
think," continued she, "of a person, with all that money in his pocket,
going about like an old beggar! No doubt he is some old miser, too rich
to be able to count his hoards. One good thing, mother, we know his
name; that may assist us in gaining admittance into the house. As soon
as Amandine can find out for us whether he has any servants or not--"

A loud barking of dogs here interrupted Calabash.

"Listen, mother," cried she; "no doubt the dogs hear the sound of a boat
approaching; it must be either Martial or Nicholas."

At the mention of Martial's name, the features of Amandine expressed a
sort of troubled joy. After waiting for some minutes, during which the
anxious looks of the impatient child were fixed on the door, she saw, to
her extreme regret, Nicholas, the future accomplice of Barbillon, make
his appearance. The physiognomy of the youth was at once ignoble and
ferocious; small in figure, short in stature, and mean in appearance, no
one would have deemed him a likely person to pursue the dangerous and
criminal path he trod. Unhappily, a sort of wild, savage energy supplied
the place of that physical force in which the hardened youth was
deficient. Over his blue loose frock he wore a kind of vest, without
sleeves, made of goatskin, covered with long brown hair. As he entered,
he threw on the ground a lump of copper, which he had with difficulty
carried on his shoulder.

"A famous good night I have made of it, mother!" said he, in a hoarse
and hollow voice, after he had freed himself from his burden. "Look
there! There's a prize. Well, I've got three more lumps of copper, quite
as big as that, in my boat, a bundle of clothes, and a case filled with
something, I know not what, for I did not waste my time in opening it.
Perhaps I have been robbed on my way home; we shall see."

"And the man you were to meet on the Quai de Billy?" inquired Calabash,
while the widow regarded her son in silence.

The only reply made by the young man consisted in his plunging his hand
into the pocket of his trousers, and jingling a quantity of silver.

"Did you take all that from him?" cried Calabash.

"No, I didn't; he shelled out two hundred francs of his own accord; and
he will fork out eight hundred more as soon as I have--But that's
enough; let's, first of all, unload my boat; we can jabber afterwards.
Is not Martial here?"

"No," said his sister.

"So much the better; we will put away the swag before he sees it;
leastways, if he can be kept from knowing about it."

"What! Are you afraid of him, you coward?" asked Calabash, provokingly.

Nicholas shrugged his shoulders significantly; then replied:

"Afraid of him? No, I should rather think not! But I have a strong
suspicion he means to sell us,--that is my only fear; as for any other
sort of dread, my weazen-slicer (knife) has rather too keen an edge for
that!"

"Ah, when he is not here, you are full of boast and brag; but only let
him show his face, and you are quiet as a mouse!"

This reproach seemed quite thrown away upon Nicholas, who, affecting not
to have heard it, exclaimed:

"Come, come! Let's unload the boat at once. Where is François, mother?
He could help us a good deal."

"Mother has locked him up, after having preciously flogged him; and, I
can tell you, he will have to go to bed without any supper."

"Well and good as far as that goes; but still, he might lend a hand in
unloading the boat,--eh, mother? Because, then myself and Calabash could
fetch all in at once."

The widow raised her hand, and pointed with her finger towards the
ceiling. Her daughter perfectly comprehended the signal, and departed at
once to fetch François.

The countenance of the widow Martial had become less cloudy since the
arrival of Nicholas, whom she greatly preferred to Calabash, but by no
means entertaining for him the affection she felt for her Toulon son, as
she designated him; for the maternal love of this ferocious woman
appeared to increase in proportion to the criminality of her offspring.
This perverse preference will serve to account for the widow's
indifference towards her two younger children, neither of whom exhibited
any disposition to evil, as well as her perfect hatred of Martial, her
eldest son, who, although not leading an altogether irreproachable life,
might still have passed for a perfectly honest and well-conducted person
if placed in comparison with Nicholas, Calabash, or his brother, the
felon at Toulon.

"Which road did you take to-night?" inquired the widow of her son.

"Why, as I returned from the Quai de Billy, where, you know, I had to go
to meet the gentleman who appointed to see me there, I spied a barge
moored alongside the quay; it was as dark as pitch. 'Halloa!' says I,
'no light in the cabin? No doubt,' says I, 'all hands are ashore. I'll
just go on board, and have a look; if I meet any one, it's easy to ask
for a bit of string, and make up a fudge about wanting to splice my
oar.' So up the side I climbs, and ventures into the cabin. Not a soul
was there; so I began collecting all I could find: clothes, a great box,
and, on the deck, four quintals of copper. So, you may guess, I was
obliged to make two journeys. The vessel was loaded with copper and
iron; but here comes François and Calabash. Now, then, let's be off to
the boat. Here, you young un, you Amandine! Look sharp, and make
yourself useful; you can carry the clothes; we must get new things, you
know, before we can throw aside our old ones."

Left alone, the widow busied herself in preparations for the family
supper. She placed on the table bottles, glasses, earthenware, plates,
with forks and spoons of silver; and, by the time this occupation was
completed, her offspring returned heavily laden.

Little François staggered beneath the weight of copper which he carried
on his shoulders, and Amandine was almost buried beneath the mass of
stolen garments which she bore on her head, while Nicholas and Calabash
brought in between them a wooden case, on the top of which lay the
fourth lump of copper.

"The case,--the case!" cried Calabash, with savage eagerness. "Come,
let's rip it open, and know what's in it."

The lumps of copper were flung on the ground. Nicholas took the heavy
hatchet he carried in his belt, and introduced its strong iron head
between the lid and the box which he had set down in the middle of the
kitchen, and endeavoured with all his strength to force it open. The red
and flickering light of the fire illumined this scene of pillage, while,
from without, the loud gusts of the night wind increased in violence.

Nicholas, meanwhile, attired in his goatskin vest, stooped over the box,
and essayed with all his might to wrench off the top, breaking out into
the most horrible and blasphemous expressions, as he found the solidity
of the fastenings resist all his endeavours to arrive at a knowledge of
its contents; and Calabash, her eyes inflamed by covetousness, her
cheeks flushed by the excitement of plunder, knelt down beside the case,
on which she leaned her utmost weight, in order to give more power to
the action of the lever employed by Nicholas. The widow, separated from
the group by the table, on the other side of which she was standing, in
her eagerness to behold the spoils, threw herself almost across the
table, the better to gaze on the booty; her longing eyes sparkled with
eagerness to learn the value of it. And finally--though unhappily, too
true to human nature--the two children, whose naturally good
inclinations had so often triumphed over the sea of vice and domestic
corruption by which they were surrounded, even they, forgetting at once
both their fears and their scruples, were alike infected by the same
fatal curiosity.

Huddling close to each other, their eyes glittering with excitement, the
breathing short and quick, François and Amandine seemed of all the party
most impatient to ascertain the contents of the case, and the most
irritated and out of patience with the slow progress made by Nicholas in
his attempts to break it open. At length the lid yielded to the powerful
and repeated blows dealt on it by the vigorous arm of the young man, and
as its fragments fell on the ground a loud, exulting cry rose from the
joyful and almost breathless group, who, joining in one wild mass, from
the mother to the little girl, rushed forward, and with savage haste
threw themselves on the opened box, which, forwarded, doubtless, by some
house in Paris to a fashionable draper and mercer residing near the
banks of the river, contained a large assortment of the different
materials employed in female attire.

"Nicholas has not done amiss!" cried Calabash, unfolding a piece of
mousseline-de-laine.

"No, faith!" returned the plunderer, opening, in his turn, a parcel of
silk handkerchiefs; "I shall manage to pay myself for my trouble."

"Levantine, I declare!" cried the widow, dipping into the box, and
drawing forth a rich silk. "Ah, that is a thing that fetches a price as
readily as a loaf of bread."

"Oh, Bras Rouge's receiver, who lives in the Rue du Temple, will buy all
the finery, and be glad of it. And Father Micou, the man who lets
furnished lodgings in the Quartier St. Honoré, will take the rest of the
swag."

"Amandine," whispered François to his little sister, "what a beautiful
cravat one of those handsome silk handkerchiefs Nicholas is holding in
his hand would make, wouldn't it?"

"Oh, yes; and what a sweet pretty _marmotte_ it would make for me!"
replied the child, in rapture at the very idea.

"Well, it must be confessed, Nicholas," said Calabash, "that it was a
lucky thought of yours to go on board that barge,--famous! Look, here
are shawls, too! How many, I wonder? One, two, three. And just see here,
mother! This one is real Bourre de Soie."

"Mother Burette would give at least five hundred francs for the lot,"
said the widow, after closely examining each article.

"Then, I'll be sworn," answered Nicholas, "if she'll give that, the
things are worth at least fifteen hundred francs. But, as the old
saying is, 'The receiver's as bad as the thief.' Never mind; so much the
worse for us! I'm no hand at splitting differences; and I shall be quite
flat enough this time to let Mother Burette have it all her own way, and
Father Micou also, for the matter of that; but then, to be sure, he is a
friend."

"I don't care for that, he'd cheat you as soon as another; I'm up to the
old dealer in marine stores. But then these rascally receivers know we
cannot do without them," continued Calabash, putting on one of the
shawls, and folding it around her, "and so they take advantage of it."

"There is nothing else," said Nicholas, coming to the bottom of the box.

"Now, let us put everything away," said the widow.

"I shall keep this shawl for myself," exclaimed Calabash.

"Oh, you will, will you?" cried Nicholas, roughly; "that depends whether
I choose to let you or not. You are always laying your clutches on
something or other; you are Madame Free-and-Easy!"

"You are so mighty particular yourself--about taking whatever you have a
fancy to, arn't you?"

"Ah, that's as different as different can be! I filch at the risk of my
life; and if I had happened to have been nabbed on board the barge, you
would not have been trounced for it."

"La! Well, don't make such a fuss,--take your shawl! I'm sure I don't
want it; I was only joking about it," continued Calabash, flinging the
shawl back into the box; "but you never can stand the least bit of fun."

"Oh, I don't speak because of the shawl; I am not stingy enough to
squabble about a trumpery shawl. One more or less would make no
difference in the price Mother Burette would give for the things; she
buys in the lump, you know," continued Nicholas; "only I consider that,
instead of calling out you should keep the shawl, it would have been
more decent to have asked me to give it you. There--there it is--keep
it--you may have it; keep it, I say, or else I'll just fling it into the
fire to make the pot boil."

These words entirely appeased Calabash, who forthwith accepted the shawl
without further scruple.

Nicholas appeared seized with a sudden fit of generosity, for, ripping
off the fag end from one of the pieces of silk, he contrived to separate
two silk handkerchiefs, which he threw to Amandine and François, who had
been contemplating them with longing looks, saying:

"There! that's for you brats; just a little taste to give you a relish
for prigging; it's a thing you'll take to more kindly if it's made
agreeable to you. And now, get off to bed. Come, look sharp, I've got a
deal to say to mother. There--you shall have some supper brought
up-stairs to you."

The delighted children clapped their hands with joy, and triumphantly
waved the stolen handkerchiefs which had just been presented to them.

"What do you say now, you little stupids?" said Calabash to them; "will
you ever go and be persuaded by Martial again? Did he ever give you
beautiful silk handkerchiefs like those, I should be glad to know?"

François and Amandine looked at each other, then hung down their heads,
and made no answer.

"Answer, can't you?" persisted Calabash, roughly. "I ask you whether you
ever received such presents from Martial?"

"No," answered François, gazing with intense delight on his bright red
silk handkerchief, "Brother Martial never gives us anything."

To which Amandine replied, in a low yet firm voice:

"Ah, François, that is because Martial has nothing to give anybody."

"He might have as much as other people if he chose to steal it, mightn't
he, François?" said Nicholas, brutally.

"Yes, brother," replied François. Then, as if glad to quit the subject,
he resumed his ecstatic contemplation of his handkerchief, saying:

"Oh, what a real beauty it is! What a fine cravat it will make for
Sundays, won't it?"

"That it will," answered Amandine. "And just see, François, how charming
I shall look with my sweet pretty handkerchief tied around my head,--so,
brother."

"What a rage the little children at the lime-kilns will be in when they
see you pass by!" said Calabash, fixing her malignant glances on the
poor children to ascertain whether they comprehended the full and
spiteful meaning of her words,--the hateful creature seeking, by the aid
of vanity, to stifle the last breathings of virtue within their young
minds. "The brats at the lime-kilns," continued she, "will look like
beggar children beside you, and be ready to burst with envy and jealousy
at seeing you two looking like a little lady and gentleman with your
pretty silk handkerchiefs."

"So they will," cried François. "Ah, and I like my new cravat ever so
much the better, Sister Calabash, now you have told me that the children
at the kilns will be so mad with me for being smarter than they; don't
you, Amandine?"

"No, François, I don't find that makes any difference. But I am quite
glad I have got such a nice new pretty _marmotte_ as that will make, all
the same."

"Go along with you, you little mean-spirited thing!" cried Calabash,
disdainfully; "you have not a grain of proper pride in you." Then,
snatching from the table a morsel of bread and cheese, she thrust them
into the children's hands, saying, "Now, get off to bed,--there is a
lanthorn; take care you don't set fire to anything, and be sure to put
it out before you go to sleep."

"And hark ye," added Nicholas, "remember that if you dare to say one
word to Martial of the box, the copper, or the clothes, I'll make you
dance upon red-hot iron; and, besides that, your pretty silk
handkerchiefs shall be taken from you."

After the departure of the children, Nicholas and his sister concealed
the box, with its contents, the clothes, and lumps of copper, in a sort
of cellar below the kitchen, the entrance to which was by a low flight
of steps not far from the fireplace.

"That'll do!" cried the hardened youth. "And now, mother, give us a
glass of your very best brandy; none of your poor, every-day stuff, but
some of the real right sort, and plenty of it. Faith! I think I've
earned a right to eat and to drink whatever you happen to have put by
for grand occasions. Come, Calabash, look sharp, and let's have supper.
Never mind Martial, he may amuse himself with picking the bones we may
leave; they are good enough for him. Now, then, for a bit of gossip over
the affair of the individual I went to meet on the Quai de Billy,
because that little job must be settled at once if I mean to pouch the
money he promised me. I'll tell you all about it, mother, from beginning
to end. But first give me something to moisten my throat. Give me some
drink, I say! Devilish hard to be obliged to ask so many times,
considering what I have done for you all to-day! I tell you I can stand
treat, if that's what you are waiting for."

And here Nicholas again jingled the five-franc pieces he had in his
pocket; then flinging his goatskin waistcoat and black woollen cap into
a distant part of the room, he seated himself at table before a huge
dish of ragout made of mutton, a piece of cold veal, and a salad. As
soon as Calabash had brought wine and brandy, the widow, still gloomy
and imperturbable, took her place at one side of the table, having
Nicholas on her right hand and her daughter on her left; the other side
of the table had been destined for Martial and the two younger children.
Nicholas then drew from his pocket a long and wide Spanish knife, with a
horn handle and a trenchant blade. Contemplating this murderous weapon
with a sort of savage pleasure, he said to the widow:

"There's my bread-earner,--what an edge it has! Talking of bread,
mother, just hand me some of that beside you."

"And talking of knives, too," replied Calabash, "François has found
out--you know what--in the wood-pile!"

"What do you mean?" asked Nicholas, not understanding her.

"Why, he saw--one of the feet!"

"Phew!" whistled Nicholas; "what, of the man?"

"Yes," answered the widow, concisely, at the same time placing a large
slice of meat on her son's plate.

"That's droll enough," returned the young ruffian; "I'm sure the hole
was dug deep enough; but I suppose the ground has sunk in a good deal."

"It must all be thrown into the river to-night," said the widow.

"That is the surest way to get rid of further bother," said Nicholas.

"Yes," chimed in Calabash, "throw it in the river, with a heavy stone
fastened to it, with part of an old boat-chain."

"We are not quite such fools as that either," returned Nicholas, pouring
out for himself a brimming glass of wine. Then, holding the bottle up,
he said, addressing the widow: "Come, mother, let's touch glasses, and
drink to each other. You seem a cup too low, and it will cheer you up."

The widow drew back her glass, shook her head, and said to her son:

"Tell me of the man you met on the Quai de Billy."

"Why, this is it," said Nicholas, without ceasing to eat and drink:
"When I got to the landing-place, I fastened my boat, and went up the
steps of the quay as the clock was striking seven at the military
bakehouse at Chaillot. You could not see four yards before you, but I
walked up and down by the parapet wall for a quarter of an hour, when I
heard footsteps moving softly behind me. I stopped, and a man,
completely wrapped up in a mantle, approached me, coughing as he
advanced. As I paused, he paused; and all I could make out of him was
that his cloak hid his nose, and his hat fell over his eyes."

We will inform our readers that this mysterious personage was Jacques
Ferrand, the notary, who, anxious to get rid of Fleur-de-Marie, had,
that same morning, despatched Madame Séraphin to the Martials, whom he
hoped to find the ready instruments of his fresh crime.

"'Bradamanti,' said the man to me," continued Nicholas; "that was the
password agreed upon by the old woman, that I might know my man.
'Ravageur,' says I, as was agreed. 'Is your name Martial?' he asked.
'Yes, master.' 'A woman was at your isle to-day: what did she say to
you?' 'That you wished to speak to me on the part of M. Bradamanti.'
'You have a boat?' 'We have four, that's our number: boatmen and
ravageurs, from father to son, at your service.' 'This is what I want
you to do if you are not afraid--' 'Afraid of what, master?' 'Of seeing
a person accidentally drowned. Only you must assist with the accident.
Do you understand?' 'Perfectly, master; we must make some individual
have a draught of the Seine, as if by accident? I'll do it; only, as the
dish to be dressed is a dainty one, why, the seasoning will cost rather
dear.' 'How much for two?' 'For two? What! are there two persons who are
to have a mess of broth in the river?' 'Yes.' 'Five hundred francs a
head, master; that's not too dear.' 'Agreed, for a thousand francs.'
'Money down, master?' 'Two hundred francs now, and the rest afterwards.'
'Then you doubt me, master?' 'No; you may pocket the two hundred
francs, without completing the bargain.' 'And you may say, after it's
done, "Don't you wish you may get it?"' 'That as may be; but does it
suit you? yes or no. Two hundred francs down, and on the evening of the
day after to-morrow, here, at nine o'clock, I will give you the eight
hundred francs.' 'And who will inform you that I have done the trick
with these two persons?' 'I shall know; that is my affair. Is it a
bargain?' 'Yes, master.' 'Here are two hundred francs. Now listen to me;
you will know again the old woman who was at your house this morning?'
'Yes, master.' 'To-morrow, or next day at latest, you will see her come,
about four o'clock in the evening, on the bank in face of your island
with a young fair girl. The old woman will make a signal to you by
waving her handkerchief.' 'Yes, master.' 'What time does it take to go
from the bank-side to your island?' 'Twenty minutes, quite.' 'Your boats
are flat-bottomed?' 'Flat as your hand, master.' 'Then you must make,
very skilfully, a sort of large hole in the bottom of one of these
boats, so that, when you open it, the water may flow in rapidly. Do you
understand?' 'Quite well, master; how clever you are! I have by me a
worn-out old boat, half rotten, that I was going to break up, but it
will just do for this one more voyage.' 'You will then leave the island
with this boat, with the hole prepared; let a good boat follow you,
conducted by some one of your family. Go to the shore, accost the old
woman and the fair young girl, and take them on board the boat with the
hole in it; then go back towards your island; but, when you are at some
distance from the bank, pretend to stoop for some purpose, open the
hole, and leap into the other boat, whilst the old woman and the fair
young girl--' 'Drink out of the same cup,--that's it,--eh, master?' 'But
are you sure you will not be interrupted? Suppose some customers should
come to your house?' 'There is no fear, master. At this time, and
especially in winter, no one comes, it is our dead time of year; and, if
they come, that would not be troublesome; on the contrary, they are all
good friends.' 'Very well. Besides, you in no way compromise yourselves;
the boat will be supposed to have sunk from old age, and the old woman
who brings the young girl will disappear with her. In order to be quite
assured that they are drowned (by accident, mind! quite by accident),
you can, if they rise to the surface, or if they cling to the boat,
appear to do all in your power to assist them, and--' 'Help them--to
sink again! Good, master!' 'It will be requisite that the passage be
made after sunset, in order that it may be quite dark when they fall
into the water.' 'No, master; for if one does not see clear, how shall
we know if the two women swallow their doses at one gulp, or want a
second?' 'True; and, therefore, the accident will take place before
sunset.' 'All right, master; but the old woman has no suspicion, has
she?' 'Not the slightest. When she arrives, she will whisper to you:
"The young girl is to be drowned; a little while before you sink the
boat, make me a signal, that I may be ready to escape with you." You
will reply to the old woman in such a way as to avoid all suspicion.'
'So that she may suppose the young 'un only is going to swallow the
dose?' 'But which she will drink as well as the fair girl.' 'It's
"downily" arranged, master.' 'But mind the old woman has not the
slightest suspicion.' 'Be easy on that score, master; she will be done
as nicely as possible.' 'Well, then, good luck to you, my lad! If I am
satisfied, perhaps I shall give you another job.' 'At your service,
master.' Then," said the ruffian, in conclusion, "I left the man in the
cloak, and 'prigged the swag' I've just brought in."

We may glean from Nicholas's recital that the notary was desirous, by a
twofold crime, of getting rid at once of Fleur-de-Marie and Madame
Séraphin, by causing the latter to fall into the snare which she
thought was only spread for the Goualeuse. It is hardly necessary to
repeat that, justly alarmed lest the Chouette should inform
Fleur-de-Marie at any moment that she had been abandoned by Madame
Séraphin, Jacques Ferrand believed he had a paramount interest in
getting rid of this young girl, whose claims might mortally injure him
both in his fortune and in his reputation. As to Madame Séraphin, the
notary, by sacrificing her, got rid of one of his accomplices
(Bradamanti was the other), who might ruin him, whilst they ruined
themselves, it is true; but Jacques Ferrand believed that the grave
would keep his secrets better than any personal interests.

The felon's widow and Calabash had listened attentively to Nicholas, who
had not paused except to swallow large quantities of wine, and then he
began to talk with considerable excitement.

"That is not all," he continued. "I have begun another affair with the
Chouette and Barbillon of the Rue aux Fêves. It is a capital job, well
planted; and if it does not miss fire, it will bring plenty of fish to
net, and no mistake. It is to clean out a jewel-matcher, who has
sometimes as much as fifty thousand francs in jewelry in her basket."

"Fifty thousand francs!" cried the mother and daughter, whose eyes
sparkled with cupidity.

"Yes--quite. Bras Rouge is in it with us. He yesterday opened upon the
woman with a letter which we carried to her--Barbillon and I--at her
house, Boulevard St. Denis. He's an out-and-outer, Bras Rouge is! As he
appears--and, I believe, is--well-to-do, nobody mistrusts him. To make
the jewel-matcher bite he has already sold her a diamond worth four
hundred francs. She'll not be afraid to come towards nightfall to his
cabaret in the Champs Elysées. We shall be concealed there. Calabash may
come with us, and take care of my boat along the side of the Seine. If
we are obliged to carry her off, dead or alive, that will be a
convenient conveyance, and one that leaves no traces. There's a plan for
you! That beggar Bras Rouge is nothing but a good 'un!"

"I have always distrusted Bras Rouge," said the widow. "After that
affair of the Rue Montmartre your brother Ambroise was sent to Toulon,
and Bras Rouge was set at liberty."

"Because he's so downy there's no proofs against him. But betray
others?--never!"

The widow shook her head, as if she were only half convinced of Bras
Rouge's probity. After a few moments' reflection she said:

"I like much better that affair of the Quai de Billy for to-morrow or
next day evening,--the drowning the two women. But Martial will be in
the way as usual."

"Will not the devil's thunder ever rid us of him?" exclaimed Nicholas,
half drunk, and striking his long knife savagely on the table.

"I have told mother that we had enough of him, and that we could not go
on in this way," said Calabash. "As long as he is here we can do nothing
with the children."

"I tell you that he is capable of one day denouncing us,--the villain!"
said Nicholas. "You see, mother, if you would have believed me," he
added, with a savage and significant air, "all would have been settled!"

"There are other means--"

"This is the best!" said the ruffian.

"Now? No!" replied the widow, with a tone so decided that Nicholas was
silent, overcome by the influence of his mother, whom he knew to be as
criminal, as wicked, but still more determined than himself.

The widow added, "To-morrow he will quit the island for ever."

"How?" inquired Nicholas and Calabash at the same time.

"When he comes in pick a quarrel with him,--but boldly, mind,--out to
his face, as you have never yet dared to do. Come to blows, if
necessary. He is powerful, but you will be two, for I will help you.
Mind, no steel,--no blood! Let him be beaten, but not wounded."

"And what then, mother?" asked Nicholas.

"We shall then explain afterwards. We will tell him to leave the island
next day; if not, that the scenes of the night before will occur over
and over again. I know him; these perpetual squabbles disgust him; until
now we have let him be too quiet."

"But he is as obstinate as a mule, and is likely enough to insist upon
staying, because of the children," observed Calabash.

"He's a regular hound; but a row don't frighten him," said Nicholas.

"One? No!" said the widow. "But every day--day by day--it is hell in
earth, and he will give way."

"Suppose he don't?"

"Then I have another sure means to make him go away,--this very night or
to-morrow at farthest," replied the widow, with a singular smile.

"Really, mother!"

"Yes, but I prefer rather to annoy him with a row; and, if that don't
do, why, then, it must be the other way."

"And if the other way does not succeed, either, mother?" said Nicholas.

"There is one which always succeeds," replied the widow.

Suddenly the door opened, and Martial entered. It blew so strong without
that they had not heard the barkings of the dogs at the return of the
first-born son of the felon's widow.




CHAPTER V.

THE MOTHER AND SON.


Unaware of the evil designs of his family, Martial entered the kitchen
slowly.

Some few words let fall by La Louve in her conversation with
Fleur-de-Marie have already acquainted the reader with the singular
existence of this man. Endowed with excellent natural instincts,
incapable of an action positively base or wicked, Martial did not,
however, lead a regular life: he poached on the water; but his strength
and his boldness inspired so much fear that the keepers of the river
shut their eyes on this irregularity.

To this illegal occupation Martial joined another that was equally
illicit. A redoubtable champion, he willingly undertook--and more from
excess of courage, from love of the thing, than for gain--to avenge in
pugilistic or single-stick encounters those victims who had been
overcome by too powerful opponents.

We should add that Martial was very particular in the selection of those
causes which he pleaded by strength of fist, and usually took the part
of the weak against the strong.

La Louve's lover was very much like François and Amandine. He was of
middle height, stout, and broad-shouldered; his thick red hair, cropped
short, came in five points over his open brow; his close, harsh, short
beard, his broad, bluff cheeks, his projecting nose, flattened at the
extremity, his blue and bold eyes, gave to his masculine features a
singularly resolute expression.

He was covered with an old glazed hat; and, despite the cold, he had
only a worn-out blouse over his vest, and a pair of velveteen trousers,
which had seen considerable service. He held in his hand a very thick,
knotted stick, which he put down beside him near the dresser.

A large dog, half terrier, half hound, with crooked legs and a black
hide, marked with bright red, came in with Martial, but he remained
close to the door, not daring to approach the fire, nor the guests who
were sitting at table, experience having proved to old Miraut (that was
the name of Martial's poaching companion) that he, as well as his
master, did not possess much of the sympathy of the family.

"Where are the children?" were Martial's first words, as he sat down to
table.

"Where they ought to be," replied Calabash, surlily.

"Where are the children, mother?" said Martial again, without taking the
slightest notice of his sister's reply.

"Gone to bed," replied the widow, in a harsh tone.

"Haven't they had their supper, mother?"

"What's that to you?" exclaimed Nicholas, brutally, after having
swallowed a large glass of wine to increase his courage, for his
brother's disposition and strength had a very strong effect on him.

Martial, as indifferent to the attacks of Nicholas as to those of
Calabash, then said to his mother, "I'm sorry the children are gone to
bed so soon."

"So much the worse," responded the widow.

"Yes, so much the worse; for I like to have them beside me when I am at
supper."

"And we, because they were troublesome and annoyed us, have sent them
off," cried Nicholas; "and if you don't like it, why, you can go after
them."

Martial, astonished, looked steadfastly at his brother. Then, as if
convinced of the futility of a quarrel, he shrugged his shoulders, cut
off a slice of bread and a piece of meat.

The dog had come up towards Nicholas, although keeping at a very
respectful distance; and the ruffian, irritated at the disdain with
which his brother treated him, and hoping to wear out his patience by
ill-using his dog, gave Miraut a savage kick, which made the poor brute
howl fearfully. Martial turned red, clasped in his hand the knife he
held, and struck violently on the table with the handle; but, again
controlling himself, he called the dog to him, saying, quietly, "Here,
Miraut!" The hound came, and crouched at his master's feet.

This composure quite upset Nicholas's plans, who was desirous of pushing
his brother to extremities, in order to produce an explosion. So he
added, "I hate dogs--I do; and I won't have this dog remain here."
Martial's only reply was to pour out a glass of wine, and drink it off
slowly. Exchanging a rapid glance with Nicholas, the widow encouraged
him by a signal to continue his hostilities towards Martial, hoping, as
we have said, that a violent quarrel would arise that would lead to a
rupture and complete separation.

Nicholas, then, taking up the willow stick which the widow had used to
beat François, went up to the dog, and, striking him sharply, said, "Get
out, you brute, Miraut!"

Up to this time Nicholas had often shown himself sulkily offensive
towards Martial, but he had never dared to provoke him with so much
audacity and perseverance. La Louve's lover, thinking they were desirous
of driving him to extremities for some secret motive, quelled every
impulse of temper.

At the cry of the beaten dog, Martial rose, opened the door of the
kitchen, made the dog go out, and then returned, and went on with his
supper. This incredible patience, so little in harmony with Martial's
usual demeanour, puzzled and nonplussed his aggressors, who looked at
each other with amazement. He, affecting to appear wholly unconscious of
what was passing around him, ate away with great appetite, keeping
profound silence.

"Calabash, take the wine away," said the widow to her daughter.

She hastened to comply, when Martial said, "Stay, I haven't done my
supper."

"So much the worse," said the widow, taking the bottle away herself.

"Oh, that's another thing!" answered La Louve's lover. And pouring out a
large glass of water, he drank it, smacking his tongue, and exclaiming,
"Capital water!"

This excessive calmness irritated the burning anger of Nicholas, already
heated by copious libations; but still he hesitated at making a direct
attack, well knowing the vast power of his brother. Suddenly he cried
out, as if delighted at the idea, "Martial, you were quite right to turn
the dog out. It is a good habit to begin to give way, for you have but
to wait a bit, and you will see us kick your sweetheart out just as we
have driven away your dog."

"Oh, yes; for if La Louve is impudent enough to come to the island when
she leaves gaol," added Calabash, who quite understood Nicholas's
motive, "I'll serve her out."

"And I'll give her a dip in the mud by the hovel at the end of the
island," continued Nicholas; "and, if she gets out, I'll give her a few
rattlers over the nob with my wooden shoe, the----"

This insult addressed to La Louve, whom he loved with savage ardour,
triumphed over the pacific resolutions of Martial; he frowned, and the
blood mounted to his cheeks, whilst the veins in his brow swelled and
distended like cords. Still, he had so much control over himself as to
say to Nicholas, in a voice slightly altered by his repressed wrath:

"Take care of yourself! You are trying to pick a quarrel, and you will
find a bone to pick that will be too tough for you."

"A bone for me to pick?"

"Yes; and I'll thrash you more soundly than I did last time."

"What! Nicholas," said Calabash, with a sardonic grin, "did Martial
thrash you? Did you hear that, mother? I'm not astonished that Nicholas
is so afraid of him."

"He walloped me, because, like a coward, he took me off my guard,"
exclaimed Nicholas, turning pale with rage.

"You lie! You attacked me unexpectedly; I knocked you flat, and then
showed you mercy. But if you talk of my mistress,--I say, mind you, of
my mistress,--this time I look it over,--you shall carry my marks for
many a long day."

"And suppose I choose to talk of La Louve?" inquired Calabash.

"Why, I'll pull your ears to put you on your guard; and if you begin
again, why, so will I."

"And suppose I speak of her?" said the widow, slowly.

"You?"

"Yes,--I!"

"You?" said Martial, making a violent effort over himself; "you?"

"You'll beat me, too, I suppose,--won't you?"

"No; but, if you speak to me unkindly of La Louve, I'll give Nicholas a
hiding he shall long remember. So now, mind! It is his affair as well as
yours."

"You?" exclaimed the ruffian, rising, and drawing his dangerous Spanish
knife; "you give me a hiding?"

[Illustration: _The Brigand dashed at his brother._
Original Etching by Adrian Marcel.]

"Nicholas, no steel!" cried the widow, quickly, leaving her seat, and
trying to seize her son's arm; but he, drunk with wine and passion,
repulsed his mother savagely, and rushed at his brother.

Martial receded rapidly, laid hold of the thick, knotted stick which he
had put down by the dresser, as he entered, and betook himself to the
defensive.

"Nicholas, no steel!" repeated the widow.

"Let him alone!" cried Calabash, taking up the ravageur's hatchet.

Nicholas, still brandishing his formidable knife, watched for a moment
when he could spring on his brother.

"I tell you," he exclaimed, "you and your trollop, La Louve, that I'll
slash your eyes out; and here goes to begin! Help, mother! Help,
Calabash! Let's make cold meat of the scamp; he's been in our way too
long already!" And, believing the moment favourable for his attack, the
brigand dashed at his brother with his uplifted knife.

Martial, who was a dexterous cudgeller, retreated a pace rapidly,
raising his stick, which, as quick as lightning, cut a figure of eight,
and fell so heavily on the right forearm of Nicholas that he, seized
with a sudden and overpowering pain, dropped his trenchant weapon.

"Villain, you have broken my arm!" he shouted, grasping with his left
hand the right arm, which hung useless by his side.

"No; for I felt my stick rebound!" replied Martial, kicking, as he
spoke, the knife underneath the dresser.

Then, taking advantage of the pain which Nicholas was suffering, he
seized him by the collar, and thrust him violently backwards, until he
had reached the door of the little cellar we have alluded to, which he
opened with one hand, whilst, with the other, he thrust his brother into
it, and locked him in, all stupefied as he was with this sudden attack.

Then, turning round upon the two women, he seized Calabash by the
shoulders, and, in spite of her resistance, her shrieks, and a blow from
the hatchet, which cut his head slightly, he shut her up in the lower
room of the cabaret, which communicated with the kitchen.

Then addressing the widow, who was still stupefied with this
manoeuvre, as skilful as it was sudden, Martial said to her, calmly,
"Now, mother, you and I are alone."

"Yes, we are alone," replied the widow, and her usually immobile
features became excited, her sallow skin grew red, a gloomy fire lighted
up her dull eye, whilst anger and hate gave to her countenance a
terrible expression. "Yes, we two are alone now!" she repeated, in a
menacing voice. "I have waited for this moment; and at length you shall
know all that I have on my mind."

"And I will tell you all I have on my mind."

"If you live to be a hundred years old, I tell you you shall remember
this night."

"I shall remember it, unquestionably. My brother and sister have tried
to murder me, and you have done nothing to prevent them. But come, let
me hear what you have against me?"

"What have I?"

"Yes."

"Since your father's death you have acted nothing but a coward's part."

"I?"

"Yes, a coward's! Instead of remaining with us to support us, you went
off to Rambouillet, to poach in the woods with that man who sells game
whom you knew at Bercy."

"If I had remained here, I should have been at the galleys like
Ambroise, or on the point of going there like Nicholas. I would not be a
robber like the rest, and that is the cause of your hatred."

"And what track are you following now? You steal game, you steal
fish,--thefts without danger,--a coward's thefts!"

"Fish, like game, is no man's property. To-day belongs to one, to-morrow
to another. It is his who can take it. I don't steal. As to being a
coward--"

"Why, you fight--and for money--men who are weaker than yourself."

"Because they have beaten men weaker than themselves."

"A coward's trade,--a coward's trade!"

"Why, there are more honest pursuits, it is true. But it is not for you
to tell me this!"

"Then why did you not take up with those honest trades, instead of
coming here skulking and feeding out of my saucepans?"

"I give you the fish I catch, and what money I have. It isn't much, but
it's enough; and I don't cost you anything. I have tried to be a
locksmith to earn more; but when one has from one's infancy led a
vagabond life on the river and in the woods, it is impossible to confine
oneself to one spot. It is a settled thing, and one's life is decided.
And then," added Martial, with a gloomy air, "I have always preferred
living alone on the water or in the forest. There no one questions me;
whilst elsewhere men twit me about my father, who was (can I deny it?)
guillotined,--of my brother, a galley-slave,--of my sister, a thief!"

"And what do you say of your mother?"

"I say--"

"What?"

"I say she is dead."

"You do right; it is as if I were, for I renounce you, dastard! Your
brother is at the galleys; your grandfather and your father finished
their lives daringly on the scaffold, mocking the priest and the
executioner! Instead of avenging them you tremble!"

"Avenging them?"

"Yes, by showing yourself a real Martial, spitting at the headsman's
knife and the red cassock, and ending like father, mother, brother,
sister--"

Accustomed as he was to the savage excitement of his mother, Martial
could not forbear shuddering. The countenance of the widow as she
uttered the last words was fearful. She continued, with increasing
wrath:

"Oh, coward! and even worse than coward! You wish to be honest! Honest?
Why, won't you ever be despised, repulsed, as the son of an assassin or
the brother of a felon? But you, instead of rousing your revenge and
wrath, this makes you frightened! Instead of biting, you run away! When
they guillotined your father, you left us,--coward! And you knew we
could not leave the island to go into the city, because they call after
us, and pelt us with stones, like mad dogs. Oh, they shall pay for it, I
can tell you,--they shall pay for it!"

"A man?--ten men would not make me afraid! But to be called after by all
the world as the son and brother of criminals! Well, I could not endure
it. I preferred going into the woods and poaching with Pierre, who sells
game."

"Why didn't you remain in the woods?"

"I returned because I got into trouble with a keeper, and besides on the
children's account, because they are of an age to take to evil from
example."

"And what is that to you?"

"To me? Why, I will not allow them to become depraved like Ambroise,
Nicholas, and Calabash."

"Indeed!"

"And if they were left with you, then they would not fail to become so.
I went apprentice to try and gain a livelihood, so that I might take
them into my own care and leave the island with the children; but in
Paris everything was known, and it was always, 'You son of the
guillotined!' or, 'You brother of the felon!' I had battles daily, and I
grew tired of it."

"But you didn't grow tired of being honest,--that answered so well!
Instead of having the pluck to come to us, and do as we do,--as the
children will do, in spite of you,--yes, in spite of you! You think to
cajole them with your preaching! But we are always here. François is
already one of us, or nearly. Let the occasion serve, and he'll be one
of the band."

"I tell you, no!"

"You will see,--yes! I know what I say. He has vice in him; but you
spoil him. As to Amandine, as soon as she is fifteen she will begin on
her own account! Ah, they throw stones at us! Ah, they pursue us like
mad dogs! They shall see what our family is made of! Except you,
dastard; for here you are the only one who brings down shame upon
us!"[5]

  [5] These frightful facts are, unfortunately, not exaggerated.
  The following is from the admirable report of M. de Bretignères
  on the Penitentiary Colony of Mettray (March 12, 1843):

"The civil condition of our colonists it is important to state. Amongst
them we count thirty-two natural children; thirty-four whose fathers and
mothers are re-married; fifty-one whose parents are in prison; 124 whose
parents have not been pursued by justice, but are in the utmost
distress. These figures are eloquent, and full of instruction. They
allow us to go from effects to causes, and give us the hope of arresting
the progress of an evil whose origin is thus arrived at. The number of
parents who are criminals enable us to appreciate the education which
the children have received under the tutelage of such instructors.
Taught evil by their fathers, the sons have become wicked by their
orders, and have believed they were acting properly in following their
example. Arrested by the hand of the law, they resign themselves to
share the destiny of their family in prison, to which they only bring
the emulation of vice; and it is absolutely necessary that a ray of
divine light should still exist within these rude and coarse natures, in
order that all the germs of honesty should not be utterly destroyed."

"That's a pity!"

"And as you may be spoiled amongst us, why, to-morrow you shall leave
this place, and never return to it."

Martial looked at his mother with surprise, then, after a moment's
silence, said, "Was it for this that you tried to get up a quarrel with
me at supper?"

"Yes, to show you what you might expect if you would stay here in spite
of us,--a hell upon earth,--I tell you, a hell! Every day a quarrel and
blows--struggles. And we shall not be alone as we were this, evening;
we shall have friends who will help us. And you will not hold out for a
week."

"Do you think to frighten me?"

"I only tell you what will happen."

"I don't heed it. I shall stay!"

"You will stay?"

"Yes."

"In spite of us?"

"In spite of you, of Calabash, of Nicholas, and all blackguards like
him."

"Really, you make me laugh."

From the lips of this woman, with her repulsive and ferocious look,
these words were horrible.

"I tell you I will remain here until I find the means of gaining my
livelihood elsewhere with the children. Alone, I should not long be
unemployed, for I could return to the woods; but, on their account, I
may be some time in finding what I am seeking for. In the meanwhile,
here I remain."

"Oh, you remain until the moment when you can take away the children?"

"Exactly as you say."

"Take away the children?"

"When I say to them 'Come!' they will come; and quickly too, I promise
you."

The widow shrugged her shoulders, and replied:

"Listen! I told you a short time since that, even if you were to live
for a hundred years, you should recollect this night. I will explain
those words. But, before I do so, have you quite made up your mind?"

"Yes! Yes! Yes! A thousand times over, yes!"

"In a little while, however, you will say 'No! No! No! A thousand times,
no!' Listen to me attentively! Do you know the trade your brother
follows?"

"I have my suspicions; but I do not wish to know."

"You shall know. He steals!"

"So much the worse for him!"

"And for you!"

"For me?"

"He commits robberies at night, with forcible entry,--burglary; a case
of the galleys. We receive what he plunders. If we are discovered, we
shall be sentenced to the same punishment as he is, as receivers, and
you too. They will sweep away the whole family, and the children will be
turned out into the streets, where they will learn the trade of their
father and grandfather as well as here."

"I apprehended as a receiver,--as your accomplice? Where's the proofs?"

"No one knows how you live. You are vagabondising on the water; you have
the reputation of a bad fellow; you dwell with us, and who will believe
that you are ignorant of our thefts and receivings?"

"I will prove the contrary."

"We will accuse you as our accomplice."

"Accuse me! And why?"

"To pay you off for staying amongst us against our will."

"Just now you tried to make me frightened in one way, now you are trying
another tack. But it won't do. I will prove that I never robbed. I
remain."

"Ah! You remain? Listen then, again! Do you remember last year a person
who passed the Christmas night here?"

"Christmas night?" said Martial, trying to recall his memory.

"Try and remember,--try!"

"I do not recollect."

"Don't you recollect that Bras Rouge brought here in the evening a
well-dressed man, who was desirous of concealing himself?"

"Yes, now I remember. I went up to bed and left him taking his supper
with you. He passed the night here, and, before daybreak, Nicholas took
him to St. Ouen."

"You are sure Nicholas took him to St. Ouen?"

"You told me so next morning."

"On Christmas night you were here?"

"Yes; and what of that?"

"Why, that night this man, who had a good deal of money about him, was
murdered in this house."

"Mur--! He! Here?"

"And robbed and buried by the little wood-pile."

"It is not true!" cried Martial, becoming pale with horror, and unable
to believe in this fresh crime of his family. "You mean to frighten me.
Once more, it is not true?"

"Ask François what he saw this morning in the wood-pile."

"François! And what did he see?"

"A man's foot sticking out of the ground. Take a lantern; go and
convince your eyes!"

"No," said Martial, wiping his brow, which had burst forth in a cold
sweat. "No, I do not believe you. You say it to--"

"To prove to you that, if you remain here in spite of us, you risk every
moment being apprehended as an accomplice in robbery and murder. You
were here on Christmas night, and we shall declare that you helped us to
do this job. How will you prove the contrary?"

"Merciless wretch!" said Martial, hiding his face in his hands.

"Now will you go?" said the widow, with a devilish smile.

Martial was overwhelmed. He, unfortunately, could not doubt what his
mother had said to him. The wandering life he led, his dwelling with so
criminal a family, must induce the most horrible suspicions of him, and
these suspicions would be converted into certainty in the eyes of
justice, if his mother, brother, and sister declared him to be their
accomplice. The widow was rejoiced at the depression of her son:

"You have one means of getting out of the difficulty: denounce us!"

"I ought, but I will not; and you know that right well."

"That is why I have told you all this. Now, will you go?"

Martial, wishing to soften this hag, said to her, in a subdued voice:

"Mother, I do not believe you are capable of this murder!"

"As you please; but go!"

"I will go on one condition."

"No condition at all!"

"You shall put the children apprentices somewhere in the country."

"They shall remain here!"

"But, mother, when you have made them like Nicholas, Calabash, Ambroise,
my father,--what good will that be to you?"

"To make good 'jobs' by their assistance. We are not too many now.
Calabash will remain here with me to keep the cabaret. Nicholas is
alone. Once properly instructed, François and Amandine will help him.
They have already been pelted with stones,--young as they are,--and they
must revenge themselves!"

"Mother, you love Calabash and Nicholas, don't you?"

"Well, if I do, what then?"

"Suppose the children imitate them, and their crimes are detected?"

"Well, what then?"

"They will come to the scaffold, like my father."

"What then? What then?"

"And does not their probable fate make you tremble?"

"That fate will be mine, neither better nor worse. I rob, they rob; I
kill, they kill. Whoever takes the mother will take the young ones; we
will not leave each other. If our heads fall, theirs will fall in the
same basket, and we shall all take leave at once! We will not retreat!
You are the only coward in the family, and we drive you from us!"

"But the children,--the children!"

"The children will grow up, and, but for you, they would have been quite
formed already. François is almost ready, and, when you are gone,
Amandine will make up for lost time."

"Mother, I entreat of you, consent to having the children sent away from
here, and put in apprenticeship at a distance."

"I tell you that they are in apprenticeship here!"

The felon's widow uttered these last words so immovably that Martial
lost all hope of mollifying this soul of bronze.

"Since it is so," he replied, "hear me in my turn, mother,--I remain!"

"Ha! ha!"

"Not in this house. I shall be assassinated by Nicholas, or poisoned by
Calabash. But, as I have no means of lodging elsewhere, I and the
children will occupy the hovel at the end of the island; the door of
that is strong, and I will make it still more secure. Once there, I will
barricade myself, and, with my gun, my stick, and my dog, I am afraid of
no one. To-morrow morning I will take the children with me. During the
day they will be with me, either in my boat or elsewhere; and, at night,
they shall sleep near me in the hovel. We can live on the fish I catch
until I find some means of placing them, and find it I will."

"Oh! That's it, is it?"

"Neither you, nor my brother, nor Calabash can prevent this, can you? If
your robberies and murders are discovered during my abode on the island,
so much the worse; but I'll chance it. I will declare that I came back
and remained here in consequence of the children, to prevent them from
becoming infamous. They will decide. The children shall not remain
another day in this abode; and I defy you and your gang to drive me from
this island!"

The widow knew Martial's resolution, and the children, who loved their
eldest brother as much as they feared her, would certainly follow him
unhesitatingly whenever and wherever he called them. As to himself, well
armed and most determined, always on his guard, in his boat during the
day, and secure and barricaded in the hovel on the island at night, he
had nothing to fear from the malevolence of his family.

Martial's project, then, might be realised in every particular; but the
widow had many reasons for preventing its execution. In the first place,
as honest work-people sometimes consider the number of their children as
wealth, in consequence of the services which they derive from them, the
widow relied on Amandine and François to assist her in her atrocities.
Then, what she had said of her desire to avenge her husband and son was
true. Certain beings, nurtured, matured, hardened in crime, enter into
open revolt, into war of extermination, against society, and believe
that, lay fresh crimes, they shall avenge themselves for the just
penalties which have been exacted from them and those belonging to them.
Then, too, the sinister designs of Nicholas against Fleur-de-Marie, and
afterwards against the jewel-matcher, might be thwarted by Martial's
presence.

The widow had hoped to effect an immediate separation between herself
and Martial, either by keeping up and aiding Nicholas's quarrel, or by
disclosing to him that, if he obstinately persisted in remaining in the
island, he ran the risk of being suspected as an accomplice in many
crimes.

As cunning as she was penetrating, the widow, perceiving that she had
failed, saw that she must have recourse to treachery to entrap her son
in her bloody snare, and she therefore replied, after a lengthened
pause, with assumed bitterness:

"I see your plan. You will not inform against us yourself, but you will
contrive that the children shall do so."

"I?"

"They know now that there is a man buried here; they know that Nicholas
has robbed. Once apprenticed they would talk, we should be apprehended,
and we should all suffer,--you with us. That is what would happen if I
listened to you, and allowed you to place the children elsewhere. Yet
you say you do not wish us any harm? I do not ask you to love me; but do
not hasten the hour of our apprehension!"

The milder tone of the widow made Martial believe that his threats had
produced a salutary effect on her, and he fell into the fearful snare.

"I know the children," he replied; "and I am sure that, in desiring them
to say nothing, not a word will they say. Besides, in one way or
another, I shall be always with them, and I will answer for their
silence."

"Can we answer for the chatter of children, especially in Paris, where
people are so curious and so gossiping? It is as much that they should
not betray us, as that they should assist us in our plans, that I desire
to keep them here."

"Don't they go sometimes to the villages, and even to Paris? Who could
prevent them from talking if they were inclined to talk? If they were a
long way off, why, so much the better; for what they would then say
would do us no harm."

"A long way off,--and where?" inquired the widow, looking steadfastly at
her son.

"Let me take them away,--where is no consequence to you."

"How will you and they live?"

"My old master, the locksmith, is a worthy man, and I will tell him as
much as he need know, and, perhaps, he will lend me something for the
sake of the children; with that I will go and apprentice them a long way
off. We will leave in two days, and you will hear no more of us."

"No, no! I prefer their remaining with me. I shall then be perfectly
sure of them."

"Then I will take up my quarters in the hovel on the island until
something turns up. I have a way and a will of my own, and you know it."

"Yes, I know it. Oh, how I wish you were a thousand miles away! Why
didn't you remain in your woods?"

"I offer to rid you of myself and the children."

"What! Would you leave La Louve here, whom you love so much?" asked the
widow, suddenly.

"That's my affair. I know what I shall do. I have my plans."

"If I let you take away Amandine and François, will you never again set
foot in Paris?"

"Before three days have passed, we shall have departed, and be as dead
to you."

"I prefer that to having you here, and always distrusting you and them.
So, since I must give way, take them, and be off as quickly as possible,
and never let me see you more!"

"Agreed!"

"Agreed! Give me the key of the cellar, that I may let Nicholas out!"

"No; let him sleep his liquor off, and I'll give you the key to-morrow
morning."

"And Calabash?"

"Ah, that's another affair! Let her out when I have gone. I can't bear
the sight of her."

"Go, and may hell confound you!"

"That's your farewell, mother?"

"Yes."

"Fortunately your last!" said Martial.

"My last!" responded the widow.

Her son lighted a candle, then opened the kitchen door, whistled to his
dog, who ran in, quite delighted at being admitted, and followed his
master to the upper story of the house.

"Go,--your business is settled!" muttered the widow, shaking her
clenched hand at her son, as he went up the stairs; "but it is your own
act."

Then, by Calabash's assistance, who brought her a bundle of false keys,
the widow unlocked the cellar door where Nicholas was, and set him at
liberty.




CHAPTER VI.

FRANÇOIS AND AMANDINE.


François and Amandine slept in a room immediately over the kitchen, and
at the end of a passage which communicated with several other apartments
that were used as "company rooms" for the guests who frequented the
cabaret. After having eaten their frugal supper, instead of putting out
their lantern, as the widow had ordered them, the two children watched,
leaving their door ajar, for their brother Martial's passing on his way
to his own chamber.

Placed on a crippled stool, the lantern shed its dull beams through the
transparent horn. Walls of plaster, with here and there brown deal
boards, a flock-bed for François, a little old child's bed, much too
short, for Amandine, a pile of broken chairs and dismembered benches,
mementoes of the turbulent visitors to the cabaret of the Isle du
Ravageur,--such was the interior of this dog-hole.

Amandine, seated at the edge of the bed, was trying how to dress her
head _en marmotte_, with the stolen silk handkerchief, the gift of her
brother Nicholas. François was on his knees, holding up a piece of
broken glass to his sister, who, with her head half turned, was employed
in spreading out the large rosette which she had made in tying the two
ends of the kerchief together. Wonder-struck at this head-dress,
François for an instant neglected to present the bit of glass in such a
way that her face could be reflected in it.

"Lift the looking-glass higher," said Amandine; "I can't see myself at
all now! There, that's it,--that'll do! Hold it so a minute! Now I've
done it! Well, look! How have I done my head?"

"Oh, capitally,--excellently! What a handsome rosette! You'll make me
just such a one for my cravat, won't you?"

"Yes, directly. But let me walk up and down a little. You can go before
me--backwards--holding the glass up, just in that way. There--so! I can
then see myself as I walk."

François then went through this difficult manoeuvre to the great
satisfaction of Amandine, who strutted up and down in all her pride and
dignity, under the large bow of her head attire.

Very simple and unsophisticated under any other circumstances, this
coquetry became guilt when displayed in reference to the produce of a
robbery of which François and Amandine were not ignorant. Another proof
of the frightful facility with which children, however well disposed,
become corrupted almost imperceptibly when they are continually immersed
in a criminal atmosphere.

Then, the sole mentor of these unfortunate children, their brother
Martial, was by no means irreproachable himself, as we have already
said. Incapable, it is true, of a theft or a murder, still he led a
vagabond and ill-regulated life. Undoubtedly his mind revolted at the
crimes of his family. He loved these two children very fondly, and
protected them from ill-treatment, endeavouring to withdraw them from
the pernicious influences of the family; but not taking his stand on the
foundations of rigorous and sound morality, his advice was but an
ineffective safeguard to these children. They refused to commit certain
bad actions, not from honest sentiments, but in order to obey Martial,
whom they loved, and to disobey their mother, whom they dreaded and
hated.

As to ideas of right and wrong, they had none, familiarised as they were
with the infamous examples which they had every day under their eyes;
for, as we have said, this country cabaret, haunted by the refuse of the
lowest order, was the theatre of most disgraceful orgies and most
disgusting debaucheries; and Martial, opposed as he was to thefts and
murders, appeared perfectly indifferent to these infamous saturnalia.

It may be supposed, therefore, that the instincts of morality in these
children were doubtful and precarious, especially those of François, who
had reached that dangerous time of life when the mind pauses, and,
oscillating between good and evil, might be in a moment lost or saved.

       *       *       *       *       *

"How well you look in that handkerchief, sister!" said François; "it is
very pretty. When we go to play on the shore by the chalk-burner's
lime-kiln you must dress yourself in this manner, to make the children
jealous who pelt us with stones and call us little guillotines. And I
shall put on my nice red cravat, and we will say to them, 'Never mind,
you haven't such pretty silk handkerchiefs as we have!'"

"But, I say, François," said Amandine, after a moment's reflection, "if
they knew that the handkerchiefs we wear were stolen, they would call us
little thieves."

"Well, and what should we care if they did call us little thieves?"

"Why, not at all, if it were not true. But now--"

"Since Nicholas gave us these handkerchiefs, we didn't steal them!"

"No; but he took them out of a barge; and Brother Martial says no one
ought to steal."

"But, as Nicholas states, that is no affair of ours."

"Do you think so, François?"

"Of course I do."

"Still, it seems to me that I would rather the person who really owns
them had given them to us. What do you say, François?"

"Oh, it's all one to me! They were given to us, and so they're ours."

"Are you sure of that?"

"Why, yes--yes; make yourself easy about that."

"So much the better, then, for we are not doing what Brother Martial
forbids, and we have such nice handkerchiefs!"

"But, Amandine, if he had known the other day that Calabash had made you
take the plaid handkerchief from the peddler's pack whilst his back was
turned?"

"Oh, François, don't talk about it; I have been so very sorry. But I was
really forced to do it, for my sister pinched me until the blood came,
and looked at me so--oh, in such a way! And yet my heart failed me
twice, and I thought I never could do it. The peddler didn't find it
out; yet, if they had caught me, François, I should have been sent to
prison."

"But you weren't caught; so it's just the same as if you had not
stolen."

"Do you think so?"

"Yes."

"And in prison how unhappy we must be."

"On the contrary--"

"How do you mean on the contrary?"

"Why, you know the fat cripple who lodges at Father Micou's, the man who
buys all Nicholas's things, and keeps a lodging-house in the Passage de
la Brasserie?"

"A fat cripple?"

"Why, yes, who came here the end of last autumn from Father Micou, with
a man who had monkeys and two women."

"Ah, yes, a stout, lame man, who spent such a deal of money."

"I believe you; he paid for everybody. Don't you recollect the rows on
the water when I pulled them, and the man with the monkeys brought his
organ, that they might have music in the boat?"

"Yes; and in the evening the beautiful fireworks they let off,
François?"

"And the fat cripple was not stingy, either. He gave me ten sous for
myself. He drank nothing but our best wine, and they had chickens at
every meal. He spent full eighty francs."

"So much as that, François?"

"Oh, yes!"

"How rich he must be!"

"Not at all. What he spent was money he had gained in prison, from which
he had just come."

"Gained all that money in prison?"

"Yes; he said he had seven hundred francs beside, and that, when that
was all gone, he should try another good 'job;' and if he were taken, he
didn't care, because he should go back to his jolly 'pals in the Stone
Jug,' as he said."

"Then he wasn't afraid of prison, François?"

"On the contrary; he told Calabash that they were a party of friends and
merrymakers all together; and that he had never had a better bed and
better food than when he was in prison. Good meat four times a week,
fire all the winter, and a lump of money when he left it; whilst there
are fools of honest workmen who are starving with cold and hunger, for
want of work."

"Are you sure he said that, François,--the stout lame man?"

"I heard him, for I was rowing him in the punt whilst he told his story
to Calabash and the two women, who said that it was the same thing in
the female prisons they had just left."

"But then, François, it can't be so bad to steal, if people are so well
off in prison."

"Oh, the deuce! I don't know. Here it is only Brother Martial who says
it is wrong to steal; perhaps he is wrong."

"Never mind if he is, François. We ought to believe him, for he loves us
so much!"

"Yes, he loves us; and, when he is by, there is no fear of our being
beaten. If he had been here this evening, our mother would not have
thrashed me so. An old beast! How savage she is! Oh, how I hate
her--hate her! And how I wish I was grown up, that I might pay her back
the thumps she gives us, especially to you, who can't bear them as well
as I can."

"Oh, François, hold your tongue; it quite frightens me to hear you say
that you would beat mother!" cried the poor little child, weeping, and
throwing her arms around her brother's neck, and kissing him
affectionately.

"It's quite true, though," answered François, extricating himself gently
from Amandine. "Why are my mother and Calabash always so savage to us?"

"I do not know," replied Amandine, wiping her eyes with the back of her
hand. "It is, perhaps, because they sent Brother Ambroise to the
galleys, and guillotined our father, that they are unjust towards us."

"Is that our fault?"

"Oh, no! But what would you have?"

"_Ma foi!_ If I am always to have beatings,--always, always, at last I
should rather steal, as they do, I should. What do I gain by not being a
thief?"

"Ah, what would Martial say to that?"

"Ah, but for him, I should have said yes a long time ago, for I am tired
of being thumped for ever; why, this evening, my mother was more savage
than ever; she was like a fury! It was pitch dark. She didn't say a
word; and I felt nothing but her clammy hand holding me by the scruff of
my neck, whilst with the other she beat me; and whilst she did so, her
eyes seemed to glare in the dark."

"Poor François! for only having said you saw a dead man's bone by the
wood-pile."

"Yes, a foot that was sticking out of the ground," said François,
shuddering with fright; "I am quite sure of it."

"Perhaps there was a burying-ground there once."

"Perhaps; but then, why did mother say she'd be the death of me, if I
said a word about the bone to our Brother Martial? I rather think it is
some one who has been killed in a quarrel, and that they have buried him
there, that no one might know anything about it."

"You are right; for don't you remember that such a thing did nearly
happen once?"

"When?"

"Don't you remember once when M. Barbillon wounded with a knife that
tall man, who is so very thin, that he showed himself for money?"

"Oh, the walking skeleton, as they call him? Yes; and mother came and
separated them; if she hadn't, I think Barbillon would have killed the
tall, thin man. Did you see how Barbillon foamed at the mouth? and his
eyes seemed ready to start from his head. Oh, he does not mind who he
cuts and slashes with his knife,--he's such a headstrong, passionate
fellow!"

"So young and so wicked, François?"

"Tortillard is much younger, and he would be quite as wicked as he, if
he were strong enough."

"Oh, yes, he's very, very wicked! The other day he beat me, because I
would not play with him."

"He beat you, did he? Then, the first time he comes--"

"No, no, François; it was only in jest."

"Are you sure?"

"Yes, quite sure."

"Very well, then, for, if not--But I don't know how he manages, the
scamp! But he always has so much money. He's so lucky! When he came
here with the Chouette, he showed us pieces of gold of twenty francs;
and didn't he look knowing as he said, 'Oh, you might have the same, if
you were not such little muffs!'"

"Muffs?"

"Yes; in slang that means fools, simpletons."

"Yes, to be sure."

"Forty francs in gold! What a many fine things I could buy with that!
Couldn't you, Amandine?"

"That I could."

"What should you buy?"

"Let's see," said the little girl, bending her head, and meditating. "I
should first buy Brother Martial a good thick outside coat, that would
keep him warm in his boat."

"But for yourself,--for yourself."

"I should like a crucifixion, like those image-sellers had on Sunday,
you know, under the church porch at Asnières."

"Yes; and, now I think of it, we must not tell mother or Calabash that
we went into a church."

"To be sure, for she has always forbidden us to go into a church. What a
pity! For church is such a nice place inside, isn't it, François?"

"Yes; and what beautiful silver candlesticks!"

"And the picture of the holy Virgin, how kind she looks!"

"And did you look at the fine lamps, and the handsome cloth on the large
table at the bottom, when the priest was saying mass with his two
friends, dressed like himself, and who gave him water and wine?"

"Tell me, François, do you remember last year, at the Fête-Dieu, when we
saw from here the little communicants, with their white veils, pass over
the bridge?"

"What nice nosegays they had!"

"How they sang in a soft tone, holding the ribands of their banners!"

"And how the silver lace of their banners shone in the sunshine! What a
deal of money it must have cost!"

"Oh, how beautiful it was! Wasn't it, François?"

"I believe you! And the communicants with their bows of white satin on
the arm, and their wax candles, with red velvet and gold on the part by
which they hold them."

"And the little boys had their banners, too, hadn't they, François? Ah,
François, how I was thumped that day for asking our mother why we did
not go in the procession, like the other children!"

"And it was then she forbade us from ever going into a church when we
should go into the town, or to Paris; 'Unless it was to rob the
poor-box, or the pockets of the people who were hearing mass,' Calabash
said, grinning, and showing her nasty yellow teeth. Oh, what a bad thing
she is!"

"Oh, and as for that, they should kill me before I would rob in a
church; and you, too, François?"

"There, or anywhere; what difference does it make, when once one has
made up one's mind?"

"Why, I don't know; but I should be so frightened, I could never do it."

"Because of the priests?"

"No; but because of the portrait of the holy Virgin, who seems so kind
and good."

"What consequence is a portrait? It won't eat or drink, you silly
child!"

"That's very true; but then I really couldn't. It is not my fault."

"Talking of priests, Amandine, do you remember that day when Nicholas
gave me two such hard boxes on the ear, because he saw me make a bow to
the curate, who passed on the bank? I had seen everybody salute him, and
so I saluted him; I didn't think I was doing any wrong."

"Yes; but then, you know, Brother Martial said, as Nicholas did, that
there was no occasion to salute the priests."

At this moment François and Amandine heard footsteps in the passage.
Martial was going to his chamber, without any mistrust, after his
conversation with his mother, believing that Nicholas was safely locked
up until the next morning. Seeing a ray of light coming from out the
closet in which the children slept, Martial came into the room. They
both ran to him, and he embraced them affectionately.

"What! Not in bed yet, little gossips?"

"No, brother, we waited until you came, that we might see you, and wish
you good night," said Amandine.

"And then we heard you speaking very loud below, as if there were a
quarrel," added François.

"Yes," said Martial, "I had some dispute with Nicholas, but it was
nothing. Besides, I am glad to see you awake, as I have some good news
for you."

"For us, brother?"

"Should you like to go away from here, and come with me a long way off?"

"Oh, yes, brother!"

"Yes, brother!"

"Well, then, in two or three days we shall all three leave the island."

"Oh, how delightful!" exclaimed Amandine, clapping her hands with joy.

"And where shall we go to?" inquired François.

"You will see, Mr. Inquisitive; no matter; but where you will learn a
good trade, which will enable you to earn your living, be sure of that."

"Then I sha'n't go fishing with you any more, brother?"

"No, my boy, you will be put apprentice to a carpenter or locksmith. You
are strong and handy, and with a good heart; and working hard, at the
end of a year you may already have earned something. But you don't seem
to like it: why, what ails you now?"

"Why, brother,--I--"

"Come, come! Speak out."

"Why, I'd rather not leave you, but stay with you, and fish, and mend
your nets, than go and learn a trade."

"Really?"

"Why, to be shut up in a workshop all day is so very dull; and then it
must be so tiresome to be an apprentice."

Martial shrugged his shoulders.

"So, then, you would rather be an idler, a scamp, a vagabond,--eh?" said
he, in a stern voice; "and then, perhaps, a thief?"

"No, brother; but I should like to live with you elsewhere, as we live
here, that's all."

"Yes, that's it; eat, drink, sleep, and amuse yourself with fishing,
like an independent gentleman,--eh?"

"Yes, I should like it."

"Very likely; but you must prefer something else. You see, my poor dear
lad, that it is quite time I took you away from here; for, without
perceiving it, you have become as idle as the rest. My mother was
right,--I fear you have vice in you. And you, Amandine, shouldn't you
like to learn some business?"

"Oh, yes, brother; I should like very much to learn anything rather than
stay here. I should dearly like to go with you and François."

"But what have you got on your head, my child?" inquired Martial,
observing Amandine's very fine head-dress.

"A handkerchief that Nicholas gave me."

"And he gave me one, too," said François, with an air of pride.

"And where did these handkerchiefs come from? I should be very much
surprised to learn that Nicholas bought them to make you a present of."

The two children lowered their eyes, and made no reply. After a second,
François said, with a resolute air, "Nicholas gave them to us. We do not
know where they came from, do we, Amandine?"

"No, no, brother," replied Amandine, stammering, and turning very red,
not daring to look Martial in the face.

"Don't tell lies," said Martial, harshly.

"We don't tell lies," replied François, doggedly.

"Amandine, my child, tell the truth," said Martial, mildly.

"Well, then, to tell the whole truth," replied Amandine, timidly, "these
fine handkerchiefs came out of a box of things that Nicholas brought in
this evening in his boat."

"And which he had stolen?"

"I think so, brother,--out of a barge."

"So then, François, you lie?" said Martial.

The boy bent down his head, but made no reply.

"Give me this handkerchief, Amandine; and yours, too, François."

The little girl took off her head-dress, gave a last look at the large
bow, which was not untied, and gave the handkerchief to Martial,
repressing a sigh of regret. François drew his slowly out of his pocket,
and then gave it to his brother, as his sister had done.

"To-morrow morning," he said, "I will return these handkerchiefs to
Nicholas. You ought not to have taken them, children. To profit by a
robbery is as if one robbed oneself."

"It is a pity those handkerchiefs were so pretty!" said François.

"When you have learned a trade, and earn money by your work, you will
buy some as good. Go to bed, my dears,--it is very late."

"You are not angry, brother?" said Amandine, timidly.

"No, no, my love, it is not your fault. You live with ill-disposed
persons, and you do as they do unconsciously. When you are with honest
persons, you will do as they do; and you'll soon be with such, or the
devil's in it. So now, good night!"

"Good night, brother!"

Martial kissed the children. They were now alone.

"What's the matter with you, François,--you seem very sorrowful!" said
Amandine.

"Why, brother has taken my nice handkerchief; and besides, didn't you
hear what he said?"

"What?"

"He means to take us with him, and put us apprentice."

"And ain't you glad?"

"_Ma foi_, no!"

"Would you rather stay here and be beaten every day?"

"Why, if I am beaten I am not made to work. I am all day in the boat,
fishing, or playing, or waiting on the customers, who sometimes give me
something, as the stout lame man did. It is much more amusing than to be
from morning till night shut up in a workshop working like a dog."

"But didn't you understand? Why, brother said that if we remained here
longer we should become evil-disposed."

"Ah! bah! That's all one to me, since the other children call us already
little thieves,--little guillotines! And then to work is too tiresome!"

"But here they are always beating us, brother!"

"They beat us because we listen to Martial more than to any one else."

"Oh, he is so kind to us!"

"Yes, he is kind,--very kind,--I don't say he ain't; and I am very fond
of him. No one dares to be unkind to us when he is by. He takes us out
with him,--that's true; but that's all; he never gives us anything."

"Why, he has nothing. What he gains he gives our mother to pay for his
eating, drinking, and lodging."

"Nicholas has something. You may be sure if we attend to what he and
mother say, they would not make our lives so uncomfortable, but give us
pretty things, as they did to-day. They would not distrust us, and we
should have money like Tortillard."

"But we must steal for that; and how that would grieve dear, good
Martial!"

"Well, so much the worse!"

"Oh, François! And then we should be taken up and put into prison."

"To be in a prison or shut up in a workshop all day is the same thing.
Besides, the Gros-Boiteux says they amuse themselves very much in
prison."

"But how sorry Martial would be; only think of that! And then it is on
our account that he returned here, and remains with us! For himself only
he would not have any difficulty, but could go again and be a poacher in
the woods which he is so very fond of."

"Oh, if he'll take us with him into the woods," said François, "that
would be better than anything else. I should be with him I am so fond
of, and should not work at any business that would tire me."

The conversation of François and Amandine was interrupted. Some one
outside double-locked their door.

"They have fastened us in," said François.

"Oh, what can it be for, brother? What are they going to do to us?"

"It is Martial, perhaps."

"Listen, listen,--how his dog barks!" said Amandine, listening.

After a few minutes, François added:

"It sounds as if some one were knocking at his door with a hammer.
Perhaps they want to force it open!"

"Yes; but how the dog barks still!"

"Listen, François! It is as if they were nailing something. Oh, dear,
oh, dear, how frightened I am! What are they doing to our brother? And
how the dog howls still!"

"Amandine, I hear nothing now," said François, going towards the door.

The two children held their breath, and listened anxiously.

"They are coming from my brother's room," said François, in a low voice;
"I hear them walking in the passage."

"Let us throw ourselves on our beds; mother would kill us if she found
us out of bed," said Amandine, terrified.

"No," said François, still listening; "they have just passed by our
door, and are running down the staircase."

"Oh, dear, oh, dear, what can it be?"

"Ah, now they are opening the kitchen door."

"Do you think so?"

"Yes, yes; I know the sound."

"Martial's dog is still howling," said Amandine, listening. Suddenly she
exclaimed, "François, our brother calls us."

"Martial?"

"Yes; don't you hear him? Don't you hear him now?"

And at this moment, in spite of the thickness of the two closed doors,
the powerful voice of Martial, who called to the children from his room,
reached them.

"Indeed, we can't go to him; we are locked in," said Amandine. "They
must be doing something wrong to him, as he calls us."

"Oh, as to that, if I could hinder them," exclaimed François,
resolutely, "I would, even if they were to cut me to pieces!"

"But our brother does not know that they have double-locked our door,
and he will believe that we would not go to his help. Call out to him
that we are locked in, François."

The lad was just going to do as his sister bade him, when a violent blow
was struck outside the shutter of the window of the room in which the
two children were.

"They are coming in by the window to kill us!" cried Amandine, and, in
her fright, she threw herself on her bed and hid her head between her
hands.

François remained motionless, although he shared his sister's terror.
However, after the violent blow we have mentioned, the shutter was not
opened, and the most profound silence reigned throughout the house.
Martial had ceased calling to the children.

A little assured, and excited by intense curiosity, François ventured to
open the window a little way, and tried to look out through the leaves
of the blind.

"Mind, brother!" said Amandine, in a low voice, and sitting up when she
heard François open the shutter.

"Can you see anything?" she added.

"No, the night is too dark."

"Don't you hear anything?"

"No, the wind is too high."

"Come in, then; come in."

"Oh, now I see something!"

"What?"

"The light of a lantern, which moves backwards and forwards."

"Who's carrying it?"

"I can only see the light. Ah, she comes nearer,--she is speaking!"

"Who?"

"Listen,--listen! It is Calabash."

"What does she say?"

"She says the ladder must be fixed securely."

"Oh, it was then in taking away the high ladder that was placed against
our shutter that they made that noise just now."

"I don't hear anything now."

"What have they done with the ladder?"

"I can't see it now."

"Can you hear anything?"

"No."

"François, perhaps they are going to use it to enter our Brother
Martial's room by the window!"

"Very likely."

"If you could open our window a little more you might see."

"I am afraid."

"Only a little bit."

"Oh, no, no! If mother saw us!"

"It is so dark, there is no danger."

François, much against his will, did as his sister requested, and
pushing the shutter back, looked out.

"Well, brother?" said Amandine, surmounting her fears, and approaching
François on tiptoe.

"By the gleam of the lantern," said he, "I see Calabash, who is holding
the foot of the ladder, which is resting against Martial's window."

"Well?"

"Nicholas is going up the ladder with his axe in his hand. I see it
glitter."

"Ah, you are not in bed, then, but watching us!" exclaimed the widow,
addressing François and his sister from outside. As she was returning to
the kitchen she saw the light, which escaped through the open window.

The unfortunate children had neglected putting out the lantern.

"I am coming," added the widow, in a terrible voice; "I am coming to
you, you little spies!"

Such were the events which passed in the Isle du Ravageur on the evening
of the day before that on which Madame Séraphin was to take
Fleur-de-Marie thither.




CHAPTER VII.

A LODGING-HOUSE.


The Passage de la Brasserie, a dark street, narrow, and but little
known, although situated in the centre of Paris, runs at one end into
the Rue Traversière St. Honoré, and at the other into the Cour St.
Guillaume.

Towards the middle of this damp thoroughfare, muddy, dark, and
unwholesome, and where the sun but rarely penetrates, there was a
furnished house (commonly called a _garni_, lodging-house, in
consequence of the low price of the apartments). On a miserable piece of
paper might be read, "Chambers and small rooms furnished." To the right
hand, in a dark alley, was the door of a store, not less obscure, in
which constantly resided the principal tenant of this _garni_.

Father Micou was ostensibly a dealer in old metal ("marine stores"), but
secretly purchased and received stolen metal, iron, lead, brass, and
tin. When we mention that Father Micou was connected in business and
friendship with the Martial family, we give a tolerable idea of his
morality. The tie that binds--the sort of affiliation, the mysterious
communion, which connects--the malefactors of Paris, is at once curious
and fearful. The common prisons are the great centres whence flow, and
to which reflow, incessantly those waves of corruption which gradually
gain on the capital, and leave there such pernicious waifs and strays.

Father Micou was a stout man, about fifty years of age, with a mean and
cunning countenance, a mulberry nose, and wine-flushed cheeks. He wore
a fur cap and an old green long-skirted coat. Over his small stove, near
which he was standing, there was a board fastened to the wall, and
bearing a row of figures, to which were affixed the keys of the chambers
of the absent lodgers. The panes of glass in the door which opened on to
the street were so painted that from the outside no one could see what
was going on within.

The whole of this extensive store was very dark. From the damp walls
there hung rusty chains of all sizes; and the floor was strewed with
iron and other metals. Three blows struck at the door in a particular
way attracted the attention of the landlord, huckster, receiver.

"Come in!" he cried.

It was Nicholas, the son of the felon's widow. He was very pale, his
features looked even more evil than they did on the previous evening,
and yet he feigned a kind of overgaiety during the following
conversation. (This scene takes place on the day after his quarrel with.
Martial.)

"Ah, is it you, my fine fellow?" said Micou, cordially.

"Yes, Father Micou, I have come to see you on a trifle of business."

"Then shut the door,--shut the door."

"My dog and cart are there outside with the stuff."

"What do you bring me, double tripe (sheet lead)?"

"No, Father Micou."

"What is it, scrapings? but no, you're too downy now, you've left off
work. Perhaps it is a bit of hard (iron)?"

"No, Daddy Micou, it's some flap (sheet copper). There must be, at
least, a hundred and fifty pounds weight, as much as my dog could
stagger along with."

"Go and fetch the flap, and let's weigh it."

"You must lend a hand, daddy, for I've hurt my arm."

And, at the recollection of his contest with his brother Martial, the
ruffian's features expressed, at once, the resentment of hatred and
savage joy, as if his vengeance were already satisfied.

"What's the matter with your arm, my man?"

"Nothing,--only a sprain."

"You must heat an iron in the fire, and plunge it red-hot into the
water, then put your arm in the water as hot as you can bear it. It is
an iron-dealer's remedy, but none the worse for that."

"Thank ye, Father Micou."

"Go and fetch the flap, and I'll come and help you, idle-bones."

At twice the copper was brought out of the cart, drawn by an enormous
dog, and conveyed into the shop.

"That cart of yours is a good idea," said the worthy Micou, as he
adjusted the wooden frames of an enormous pair of scales that hung from
a beam in the ceiling.

"Yes; when I've anything to bring, I put my dog and cart into the punt,
and harness them as we come along. A hackney-coach might, perhaps, tell
a tale, but my dog never chatters."

"And they're all pretty well at home,--eh?" inquired the receiver,
weighing the copper; "mother and sister, both pretty bobbish?"

"Yes, Father Micou."

"And the little uns?"

"Yes, the little uns, too. And your nephew, André, where is he?"

"Don't mention him; he was out on a spree yesterday. Barbillon and
Gros-Boiteux brought him back this morning. He is out for a walk now
towards the General Post-office in the Rue St. Jacques Rousseau. And
your brother, Martial, is he just such a rum un as ever?"

"_Ma foi!_ I don't know."

"Don't know?"

"No," replied Nicholas, assuming an indifferent air; "we have seen
nothing of him for the last two days. Perhaps he's gone poaching in the
woods again; unless his boat, which was very, very old, has sunk in the
river, with him in it."

"At which you would not be dreadfully affected, you bad lot, for you
can't bear your brother, I know."

"True; we have strange likes and dislikes. How many pounds of metal d'ye
make?"

"You're right to a hair, just a hundred and fifty pounds, my lad."

"And you owe me--"

"Just thirty francs."

"Thirty francs! when copper is twenty sous a pound? Thirty francs!"

"Say thirty-five francs, and there's an end of the matter, or go to the
devil with you! you, and your copper, and your dog, and your cart."

"But, Father Micou, you are really chiselling me down; that's not the
right thing by no means."

"If you'll tell me how you came by your copper, I'll give you fifteen
sous a pound for it."

"That's the old strain. You are all alike, a regular lot of cheats. How
can you bear to 'do' your friends in this way? But that's not all; if I
swap with you for some things, you ought to give me good measure."

"To a hair's turn. What do you want? Chains and hooks for your punts?"

"No, I want four or five sheets of stout iron, as if to line shutters
with."

"I've just the thing, a quarter of an inch thick; a pistol-ball wouldn't
go through it."

"Just what I want."

"What size?"

"Why, altogether about seven or eight feet square."

"Good, and what else?"

"Three bars of iron, from three to four feet long, and two inches
square."

"I have just broken up an iron wicket; nothing can be better for you.
What next?"

"Two strong hinges and a latch, so that I can open or shut an opening
two feet square when I wish."

"A trap, you mean?"

"No, a valve."

"I don't understand what you can want with a valve."

"Never you mind; I know what I want."

"That's all right; you have only to choose; there's a heap of hinges.
What's the next thing?"

"That's all."

"And not much, either."

"Get it all ready, Father Micou, and I'll take it as I come back; for
I've got some other places to call at."

"With your cart? Why, you dog, I saw a bundle underneath. What, some
little trifle you have taken from the world's wardrobe? Ah, you sly
rogue!"

"Just as you say, Father Micou; but you don't deal in such things. Don't
keep me waiting for the iron goods, for I must be back at the island
before noon."

"I'll be ready. It is only eight, and, if you are not going far, come
back in an hour, and you shall find everything prepared,--money and
goods. Won't you take a drain?"

"Thank ye, I won't say no, for I think you owe it me."

Father Micou took from an old closet a bottle of brandy, a cracked
glass, and a cup without a handle, and filled them.

"Here's to you, Daddy Micou!"

"And to you likewise, my boy, and the ladies at home!"

"Thank ye. And the lodging-house goes on well, eh?"

"Middling,--middling. I have always some lodgers for whom I am always
fearing a visit from the commissary; but they pay in proportion."

"How d'ye mean?"

"Why, are you stupid? I sometimes lodge as I buy, and don't ask them for
their passport, any more than I ask you for your bill of parcels."

"Good; but to them you let as dear as you have bought cheaply of me."

"I must look out. I have a cousin who has a handsome furnished house in
the Rue St. Honoré. His wife is a milliner in a large way, and employs,
perhaps, twenty needlewomen, either in the house, or having the work at
home."

"I say, old boy, I dare say there's some pretty uns among 'em?"

"I believe you. There's two or three that I have seen bring home work
sometimes,--my eyes, ain't they pretty, though? One little one in
particular, who works at home, and is always a-laughing, and they calls
her Rigolette, oh, my pippin, what a pity one ain't twenty years old all
over again!"

"Halloa, daddy, how you are going it!"

"Oh, it's all right, my boy,--all right!"

"'Walker!' old boy. And you say your cousin--"

"Does uncommon well with his house, and, as it is the same number as
that of the little Rigolette--"

"What, again?"

"Oh, it's all right and proper."

"'Walker!'"

"He won't have any lodgers but those who have passports and papers; but
if any come who haven't got 'em, he sends me those customers."

"And they pays accordingly?"

"In course."

"But they are all in our line who haven't got their riglar papers?"

"By no manner of means! Why, very lately, my cousin sent me a
customer,--devil burn me if I can make him out! Another drain?"

"Just one; the liquor's good. Here's t'ye again, Daddy Micou!"

"Here's to you again, my covey! I was saying that the other day my
cousin sent me a customer whom I can't make out. Imagine a mother and
daughter, who looked very queer and uncommon seedy; they had their whole
kit in a pocket-handkerchief. Well, there warn't much to be expected out
of this, for they had no papers, and they lodge by the fortnight; yet,
since they've been here, they haven't moved any more than a dormouse. No
men come to see them; and yet they're not bad-looking, if they weren't
so thin and pale, particularly the daughter, about sixteen,--with such a
pair of black eyes,--oh, such eyes!"

"Halloa, dad! You're off again. What do these women do?"

"I tell you I don't know; they must be respectable, and yet, as they
receive letters without any address, it looks queer."

"What do you mean?"

"They sent, this morning, my nephew André to the _Poste-Restante_ to
inquire for a letter addressed to 'Madame X. Z.' The letter was expected
from Normandy, from a town called Aubiers. They wrote that down on
paper, so that André might get the letter by giving these particulars.
You see, it does not look quite the thing for women to take the name of
'X.' and 'Z.' And yet they never have any male visitors."

"They won't pay you."

"Oh, my fine fellow, they don't catch an old bird like me with chaff.
They took a room without a fireplace, and I made them pay the twenty
francs down for the fortnight. They are, perhaps, ill, for they have not
been down for the last two days. It is not indigestion that ails them,
for I don't think they have cooked anything since they came here."

"If you had all such customers, Father Micou--"

"Oh, they go and come. If I lodge people without passports, why, I also
have different people. I have now two travelling gents, a postman, the
leader of the band at the Café des Aveugles, and a lady of fortune,--all
most respectable persons, such as save the reputation of a house, if the
commissary is inclined to look a little too closely into things; they
are not night-lodgers, but tenants of the broad sunshine."

"When it comes into your alley, Father Micou."

"You're a wag. Another drain, yes, just one more."

"Well, it must be my last, for then I must cut. By the way, doesn't
Robin, the Gros-Boiteux, lodge here still?"

"Yes, up-stairs, on the same landing as the mother and daughter. He's
pretty nearly run through his money he earned in gaol."

"I say, mind your eye,--he's outlawed."

"I know it, but I can't get rid of him. I think he's got something in
hand, for little Tortillard came here the other night along with
Barbillon. I'm afraid he'll do something to my lodgers, so, when his
fortnight is up, I shall bundle him, telling him his room is taken for
an ambassador, or the husband of Madame Saint-Ildefonse, my independent
lady."

"An independent lady?"

"I believe you! Three rooms and a cabinet in the front,--nothing
less,--newly furnished, to say nothing of an attic for her servant.
Eighty francs a month, and paid in advance by her uncle, to whom she
gives one of her spare rooms when he comes up from the country. But I
believe his country-house is about the Rue Vivienne, or the Rue St.
Honoré."

"I twig! She's independent because the old fellow pays."

"Hush! Here's her maid."

A middle-aged woman, wearing a white apron of very doubtful cleanliness,
entered the dealer's warehouse.

"What can I do for you, Madame Charles?"

"Father Micou, is your nephew within?"

"He has gone to the post-office; but I expect him in immediately."

"M. Badinot wishes him to take this letter to its address instantly.
There's no answer, but it is in great haste."

"In a quarter of an hour he will be on his way thither, madame."

"He must make great haste."

"He shall, be assured."

The servant went away.

"Is she the maid of one of your lodgers, Father Micou?"

"She is the _bonne_ of my independent lady, Madame Saint-Ildefonse. But
M. Badinot is her uncle; he came from the country yesterday," said the
respectable Micou, who was looking at the letter, and then added,
reading the address, "Look, now, what grand acquaintances! Why, I told
you they were high folks; he writes to a viscount."

"Oh, bah!"

"See here, then, 'To Monsieur the Vicomte de Saint-Remy, Rue de
Chaillot. In great haste. Private.' I hope, when we lodge independent
persons who have uncles who write to viscounts, we may allow some few of
our other lodgers higher up in the house to be without passports, eh?"

"I believe you. Well, then, Father Micou, we shall soon be back. I shall
fasten my dog and cart to your door, and carry what I have; so be ready
with the goods and the money, so that I may cut at once."

"I'll be ready. Four good iron plates, each two feet square, three bars
of iron two feet long, and two hinges for your valve. This valve seems
very odd to me; but it's no affair of mine. Is that all?"

"Yes, and my money?"

"Oh, you shall have your money. But now I look at you in the light--now
I get a good view of you--"

"Well?"

"I don't know--but you seem as if something was the matter."

"I do?"

"Yes."

"Oh, nonsense! If anything ails me it is that I'm hungry."

"You're hungry? Like enough; but it rather looks as if you wanted to
appear very lively, whilst all the while there's something that worries
you; and it must be _something_, for it ain't a trifle that puts you
out."

"I tell you you're mistaken, Father Micou," said Nicholas, shuddering.

"Why, you quite tremble!"

"It's my arm that pains me."

"Well, don't forget my prescription, that will cure you."

"Thank ye, I'll soon be back." And the ruffian went on his way.

The receiver, after having concealed the lumps of copper behind his
counter, occupied himself in collecting the various things which
Nicholas had requested, when another individual entered his shop. It was
a man about fifty years of age, with a keen, sagacious face, a thick
pair of gray whiskers, and gold spectacles. He was extremely well
dressed; the wide sleeves of his brown paletot, with black velvet cuffs,
showing his hands covered with thin coloured kid gloves, and his boots
bore evidence of having been on the previous evening highly polished.

It was M. Badinot, the independent lady's uncle, that Madame
Saint-Ildefonse, whose social position formed the pride and security of
Père Micou. The reader may, perchance, recollect that M. Badinot, the
former attorney, struck off that respectable list, then a Chevalier
d'Industrie, and agent in equivocal matters, was the spy of Baron de
Graün, and had given that diplomatist many and very precise particulars
as to many personages connected with this tale.

"Madame Charles has just given you a letter to send?" said M. Badinot,
to the dealer in _et ceteras_.

"Yes, sir; my nephew I expect every moment, and he shall go directly."

"No, give me the letter again, I have changed my mind. I shall go myself
to the Comte de Saint-Remy," said M. Badinot, pronouncing this
aristocratic name very emphatically, and with much importance.

"Here's the letter, sir; have you any other commission?"

"No, Père Micou," said M. Badinot, with a protecting air, "but I have
something to scold you about."

"Me, sir?"

"Very much, indeed."

"About what, sir?"

"Why, Madame de Saint-Ildefonse pays very expensively for your first
floor. My niece is a lodger to whom the greatest respect ought to be
paid; she came highly recommended to your house, and, having a great
aversion to the noise of carriages, she hoped she should be here as if
she were in the country."

"So she is; it is quite like a village here. You ought to know,
sir,--you who live in the country,--this is a real village."

"A village! Very like, indeed! Why, there is always such an infernal din
in the house."

"Still, it is impossible to find a quieter house. Above the lady, there
is the leader of the band at the Café des Aveugles, and a gentleman
traveller; over that, another traveller; over that--"

"I am not alluding to those persons; they are very quiet, and appear
very respectable. My niece has no fault to find with them; but in the
fourth, there is a stout lame man, whom Madame de Saint-Ildefonse met
yesterday tipsy on the stairs; he was shrieking like a savage, and she
nearly had a fit, she was so much alarmed. If you think that, with such
lodgers, your house resembles a village--"

"Sir, I assure you I only wait the opportunity to turn this stout lame
man out-of-doors; he has paid his last fortnight in advance, otherwise I
should already have turned him out."

"You should not have taken in such a lodger."

"But, except him, I hope madame has nothing to complain of. There is a
twopenny postman, who is the cream of honest fellows, and overhead,
beside the chamber of the stout lame man, a lady and daughter, who do
not move any more than dormice."

"I repeat, Madame de Saint-Ildefonse only complains of this stout lame
man, who is the nightmare of the house; and I warn you that, if you keep
such a fellow in your house, you will find all your respectable lodgers
leave you."

"I will send him away, you may be assured. I have no wish to keep him."

"You will only do what's right, for else your house will be forsaken."

"Which will not answer my purpose at all; so, sir, consider the stout
lame man as gone, for he has only four more days to stay here."

"Which is four days too many; but it is your affair. At the first
outbreak, my niece leaves your house."

"Be assured, sir--"

"It is all for your own interest,--and look to it, for I am not a man
of many words," said M. Badinot, with a patronising air, and he went
out.

Need we say that this female and her young daughter, who lived so
lonely, were the two victims of the notary's cupidity? We will now
conduct the reader to the miserable retreat in which they lived.




CHAPTER VIII.

THE VICTIMS OF MISPLACED CONFIDENCE.[6]


Let the reader picture to himself a small chamber on the fourth floor of
the wretched house in the Passage de la Brasserie. Scarcely could the
faint glimmers of early morn force their pale rays through the narrow
casements forming the only window to this small apartment; the three
panes of glass that apology for a window contained were cracked and
almost the colour of horn, a dingy and torn yellow paper adhered in some
places to the walls, while from each corner of the cracked ceiling hung
long and thick cobwebs; and to complete the appearance of wretchedness
so evident in this forlorn spot, the flooring was broken away, and, in
many places, displayed the beams which supported it, as well as the lath
and plaster forming the ceiling of the room beneath. A deal table, a
chair, an old trunk, without hinges or lock, a truckle-bed, with a
wooden headboard, covered by a thin mattress, coarse sheets of
unbleached cloth, and an old rug,--such was the entire furniture of this
wretched chamber.

  [6] "The average punishment awarded to such as are convicted
  of breach of trust is two months' imprisonment and a fine of
  twenty-five francs."--_Art. 406 and 408 of the "Code Penal."_

On the chair sat the Baroness de Fermont, and in the bed reposed her
daughter, Claire de Fermont. Such were the names of these two victims of
the villainy of Jacques Ferrand. Possessing but one bed, the mother and
child took it by turns to sleep. Too much uneasiness and too many bitter
cares prevented Madame de Fermont from enjoying the blessing of repose;
but her daughter's young and elastic nature easily yielded to the
natural impulse which made her willingly seek in short slumbers a
temporary respite from the misery by which she was surrounded during her
waking hours. At the present moment she was sleeping peacefully.

Nothing could be imagined more touchingly affecting than the picture of
misery imposed by the avarice of the notary on two females hitherto
accustomed to every comfort, and surrounded in their native city by that
respect which is ever felt for honourable and honoured families.

Madame de Fermont was about six and thirty years of age, with a
countenance at once expressive of gentleness and intelligence, mingled
with an indescribably noble and majestic air. Her features, which had
once boasted extreme beauty, were now pale and careworn; her dark hair
was separated on her forehead, and formed two thick, lustrous bandeaux,
which, after shading her pallid countenance, were twisted in with her
back hair, whose tresses the hand of sorrow had already mingled with
gray. Dressed in an old shabby black dress, patched and pieced in
various places, Madame de Fermont, her head supported by her hand, was
surveying her child with looks of ineffable tenderness.

Claire was but sixteen years of age, and her gentle and innocent
countenance, thin and sorrowful as that of her mother, looked still more
pallid as contrasted with the coarse, unbleached linen which covered her
bolster, filled only with sawdust. The once brilliant complexion of the
poor girl had sickened beneath the privations she endured; and, as she
slept, the long, dark lashes which fringed her large and lustrous eyes
stood out almost unnaturally upon her sunken cheek; the once fresh and
rosy lips were now dry, cracked, and colourless, yet, half opened as
they were, they displayed the faultless regularity of her pearly teeth.

The harsh contact of the rough linen which covered her bed had caused a
temporary redness about the neck, shoulders, and arms of the poor girl,
whose fine and delicate skin was marbled and spotted by the friction
both of the miserable sheets and rug. A sensation of uneasiness and
discomfort seemed to pervade even her slumbers; for the clearly defined
eyebrows, occasionally contracted, as though the sleeper were under the
influence of an uneasy dream, and the pained expression observable on
the features, foretold the deadly nature of the disease at work within.

Madame de Fermont had long ceased to find relief in tears, but, like her
suffering daughter, she found that weakness, languor, and dejection,
which is ever the precursor of severe illness, rapidly and daily
increasing; but, unwilling to alarm Claire, and wishing, if possible,
even to conceal the frightful truth from herself, the wretched mother
struggled against the first approaches of her malady, while, from a
similar feeling of devotion and affection, Claire sought to hide from
her parent the extreme suffering she herself experienced.

To attempt to describe the tortures endured by the tender mother, as,
during the greater part of the night, she watched her slumbering child,
her thoughts alternately dwelling on the past, the present, and the
future, would be to paint the sharpest, bitterest, wildest agony that
ever crossed the brain of a loving and despairing mother; to give
alternately her reminiscences of bygone happiness, her shuddering dread
of impending evil, her fearful anticipations, her bitter regrets, and
utter despondency, mingled with bursts of frenzied rage against the
author of all her sorrows, vain supplications, eager, earnest prayers,
ending at last fearfully and dreadfully in openly expressed mistrust of
the omnipotence and justice of the Great Being who could thus remain
insensible to the cry which arose from a mother's breaking heart, to
that holy plea whose sound should reach the throne of grace,--"Pity,
pity, for my child!"

"How cold she is!" cried the poor mother, lightly touching with her icy
hand the equally chill arm of her child; "how very, very cold! and
scarcely an hour ago just as hot! Alas, 'tis the cruel fever which has
seized upon her! Happily the dear creature is as yet unconscious of her
malady! Gracious heaven, she is becoming cold as death itself! What
shall I do to bring warmth to her poor frame? The bed-coverings are so
slight! A good thought! I will throw my old shawl over her. But no, no!
I dare not remove it from the door over which I have hung it, lest those
men so brutally intoxicated should endeavour, as they did yesterday, to
look into the room through the disjointed panels or openings in the
framework.

"What a horrible place we have got into! Oh, if I had but known by what
description of persons it was inhabited before I paid the fortnight in
advance! Certainly, we would not have remained here. But, alas, I knew
it not; and when we have no vouchers for our respectability, it is so
difficult to obtain furnished lodgings. Who could ever have thought I
should have been at a loss,--I who quitted Angers in my own carriage,
deeming it unfit my daughter should travel by any public conveyance? How
could I have imagined that I should experience any difficulty in
obtaining every requisite testimonial of my honour and honesty?"

Then bursting into a fit of anger, she exclaimed, "'Tis too, too hard,
that because this unprincipled, hard-hearted notary chooses to strip us
of all our possessions, I have no means of punishing him! Yes; had I
money I might sue him legally for his misconduct. But would not that be
to bring obloquy and contempt on the memory of my good, my noble-minded
brother; to have it publicly proclaimed that he consummated his ruin by
taking away his own life, after having squandered my fortune and that of
my child; to hear him accused of reducing us to want and wretchedness?
Oh, never,--never! Still, however dear and sacred is the memory of a
brother, should not the welfare of my child be equally so?

"And wherefore, too, should I give rise to useless tales of family
misery, unprovided as I am with any proofs against the notary? Oh, it
is, indeed, a cruel,--a most cruel case. Sometimes, too, when irritated,
goaded by my reflections almost to madness, I find myself indulging in
bitter plaints against my brother, and think his conduct more culpable
than even the notary's, as though it were any alleviation of my woes to
have two names to execrate instead of one. But quickly do I blush at my
own base and unworthy suspicions of one so good, so honourable, so
noble-minded as my poor brother! This infamous notary knows not all the
fearful consequences of his dishonesty. He fancies he has but taken from
us our worldly goods, while he has plunged a dagger in the hearts of two
innocent, unoffending victims, condemned by his villainy to die by
inches. Alas, I dare not breathe into the ear of my poor child the full
extent of my fears, lest her young mind should be unable to support the
blow!

"But I am ill,--very, very ill; a burning fever is in my veins; and 'tis
only with the greatest energy and resolution I contrive to resist its
approaches. But too certainly do I feel aware that the germs of a
possibly mortal disease are in me. I am aware of its gaining ground
hourly. My throat is parched, my head burns and throbs with racking
pains. These symptoms are even more dangerous than I am willing to own
even to myself. Merciful God! If I were to be ill,--seriously, fatally
ill,--if I should die! But no, no!" almost shrieked Madame Fermont, with
wild excitement; "I cannot,--I will not die! To leave Claire at sixteen
years of age, alone, and without resource, in the midst of Paris!
Impossible! Oh, no, I am not ill; I have mistaken the effects of sorrow,
cold, and want of rest, for the precursory symptoms of illness. Any
person similarly placed would have experienced the same. It is nothing,
nothing worth noticing. There must be no weakness on my part. 'Tis by
yielding to such dismal anticipations that one becomes really attacked
by the very malady we dread. And besides, I have not time to be ill. Oh,
no! On the contrary, I must immediately exert myself to find employment
for Claire and myself, since the wretch who gave us the prints to colour
has dared to--"

After a short silence, Madame de Fermont, leaving her last sentence
unfinished, indignantly added:

"Horrible idea! To ask the shame of my child in return for the work he
doles out to us, and to harshly withdraw it because I will not suffer my
poor Claire to go to his house unaccompanied, and work there during the
evening alone with him! Possibly I may succeed in obtaining work
elsewhere, either in plain or ornamental needlework. Yet it is so very
difficult when we are known to no one; and very recently I tried in
vain. Persons are afraid of entrusting their materials to those who live
in such wretched lodgings as ours. And yet I dare not venture upon
others more creditable; for what would become of us were the small sum
we possess once exhausted? What could we do? We should be utterly
penniless; as destitute as the veriest beggar that ever walked the
earth.

"And then to think I once was among the richest and wealthiest! Oh, let
me not think of what has been; such considerations serve but to increase
the already excited state of my brain. It will madden me to recollect
the past; and I am wrong--oh, very wrong--thus to dwell on ideas that
sadden and depress instead of raising and invigorating my enfeebled
mind. Had I gone on thus weakly indulging regrets, I might, indeed, have
fallen ill,--for I am by no means so at present. No, no," continued the
unfortunate parent, placing her fingers upon the wrist of her left
hand, "my fever has left me,--my pulse beats tranquilly."

Alas! the quick, irregular, and hurried pulsation perceptible beneath
the parched yet icy skin allowed not of such flattering hopes; and,
after pausing in deep and heartfelt wretchedness for a short space, the
unhappy Madame de Fermont thus continued:

"Wherefore, O God of Mercies, thus visit with thine anger two wretched
and helpless creatures, utterly unconscious of having merited thy
displeasure? What has been the crime that has thus drawn down such heavy
punishments upon our heads? Was not my child a model of innocent piety,
as her father was of honour? Have I not ever scrupulously fulfilled my
duties both as wife and mother? Why, then, permit us to become the
victims of a vile, ignoble wretch,--my sweet, my innocent child more
especially? Oh, when I remember that, but for the nefarious conduct of
this notary, the rising dawn of my daughter's existence would have been
clear and unclouded, I can scarcely restrain my tears. But for his base
treachery we should now be in our own home, without further care or
sorrow than such as arose from the painful and unhappy circumstances
attending the death of my poor brother. In two or three years' time I
should have begun to think of marrying my sweet Claire, that is, if I
could have found any one worthy of so good, so pure-minded, and so
lovely a creature as herself. Who would not have rejoiced in obtaining
such a bride? And further, after having merely reserved to myself a
trifling annuity, sufficient to have enabled me to live somewhere in the
neighbourhood, I intended, on her marriage, to bestow on her the whole
of my remaining possessions, amounting to at least one hundred thousand
crowns; for I should have been enabled to lay by something. And, when a
lovely and beautiful young creature, like my Claire, gifted with all the
advantages of a superior education, can, in addition, boast of a dowry
of more than one hundred thousand crowns--"

Then, as she again returned to the realities of her present position,
altogether overcome by the painful contrast, Madame de Fermont
exclaimed, almost frantically:

"Still, it is not to be supposed that, because the notary so wills it, I
shall sit tamely by and see my only and beloved child reduced to the
most abject misery, entitled as she is to a life of the most unalloyed
felicity. If I can obtain no redress from the laws of my country, I will
not permit the infamous conduct of this man to escape unpunished. For if
I am driven to desperation, if I find no means of extricating my
daughter and myself from the deplorable condition to which the villainy
of this man has brought us, I cannot answer for myself, or what I may
do. I may be driven by madness to retaliate on this man, even by taking
his life. And what if I did, after all I have endured, after all the
scalding tears he has caused me to shed, who could blame me? At least I
should be secure of the pity and sympathy of all mothers who loved their
children as I do my Claire. Yes; but, then, what would be her
position,--left alone, friendless, unexperienced, and destitute? Oh, no,
no, that is my principal dread; therefore do I fear to die.

"And for that same reason dare I not harm the traitor who has wrought
our ruin. What would become of her at sixteen?--pure and spotless as an
angel, 'tis true. But then she is so surpassingly lovely; and want,
desolation, cold, and misery are fearful things to oppose alone and
unaided. How fearful a conflict might be presented to one of her tender
years, and into how terrible an abyss might she not fall? Oh,
want,--fatal word! As I trace it, a crowd of sickening images rise
before me, and distract my senses. Destitution, dreadful as it is to
all, is still more formidable to those who have lived surrounded not
only with every comfort, but even luxury. One thing I cannot pardon
myself for, and that is that, in the face of all these overwhelming
trials, I have not yet been able to subdue my unfortunate pride; and I
feel persuaded that nothing but the sight of my child, actually
perishing before my eyes for want of bread, could induce me to beg. How
weak, how selfish and cowardly! Still--"

Then, as her thoughts wandered to the source of all her present
sufferings and anguish, she mournfully continued:

"The notary has reduced me to a state of beggary; I must, therefore,
yield to the stern necessity of my situation. There must be an end of
all delicacy as well as scruples. They might have been well enough in
bygone days; but my duty is now to stretch forth my hand to solicit
charitable aid for both my daughter and myself. And if I fail in
procuring work, I must make up my mind to implore the charity of my
fellow creatures, since the roguery of the notary has left me no
alternative. Doubtless in that, as in other trades, there is an art, an
expertness to be acquired, and which experience alone can bestow. Never
mind," continued she, with a sort of feverish wildness, "one must learn
one's craft, and only practice can make perfect. Surely mine must be a
tale to move even the most unfeeling. I have to tell of misfortunes
alike severe and unmerited,--of an angelic child, but sixteen years of
age, exposed to every evil of life. But then it requires a practised
hand to set forth all these qualifications, so as best to excite
sympathy and compassion. No matter; I shall manage it, I feel quite
sure. And, after all," exclaimed the half distracted woman, with a
gloomy smile, "what have I so much to complain of? Fortune is perishable
and precarious; and the notary will, at least, if he has taken my money,
have compelled me to adopt a trade."

For several minutes Madame de Fermont remained absorbed in her
reflections, then resumed more calmly:

"I have frequently thought of inquiring for some situation. What I seem
to covet is just such a place as a female has here who is servant to a
lady living on the first floor. Had I that situation I might probably
receive wages sufficient to maintain Claire; and I might even, through
the intervention of the mistress I served, be enabled to obtain
occupation for my daughter, who then would remain here. Neither should I
be obliged to quit her. Oh, what joy, could it be so arranged! But no,
no, that would be happiness too great for me to expect; it would seem
like a dream. And then, again, if I obtained the place, the poor woman
now occupying it must be turned away. Possibly she is as poor and
destitute as ourselves. Well, what if she be? No scruple has arisen to
save us from being stripped of our all, and my child's preservation
outweighs all fastidious notions of delicacy in my breast. The only
difficulty consists in obtaining an introduction to the lady on the
first floor, and contriving to dispossess the servant of a place which
would be to me the very perfection of ease and comfort."

Several loud and hasty knocks at the door startled Madame de Fermont,
and made her daughter spring up with a sudden cry.

"For heaven's sake, dear mother," asked poor Claire, trembling with
fear, "what is the matter?" And then, without giving her agitated parent
time to recover herself, the terrified girl threw her arms around her
mother's neck, as if she sought for safety in that fond, maternal bosom,
while Madame de Fermont, pressing her child almost convulsively to her
breast, gazed with terror at the door.

"Mamma, mamma," again moaned Claire, "what was that noise that awoke me?
And why do you seem so much alarmed?"

"I know not, my child, what it was. But calm yourself, there is nothing
to fear; some one merely knocked at the door,--possibly to bring us a
letter from the post-office."

At this moment the worm-eaten door shook and rattled beneath the blows
dealt against it by some powerful fist.

"Who is there?" inquired Madame de Fermont, in a trembling tone.

A harsh, coarse, and vulgar voice replied, "Holloa, there! What, are you
so deaf there's no making you hear? Holloa, I say, open your door; and
let's have a look at you. Hip, hip, holloa! Come, sharp's the word; I'm
in a hurry."

"I know you not," exclaimed Madame de Fermont, striving to command
herself sufficiently to speak with a steady voice; "what is it you seek
here?"

"Not know me? Why, I'm your opposite neighbour and fellow lodger, Robin.
I want a light for my pipe. Come, cut about. Whoop, holloa! Don't go to
sleep again, or I must come in and wake you."

"Merciful heavens!" whispered the mother to her daughter, "'tis that
lame man, who is nearly always intoxicated."

"Now, then, are you going to give me a light? Because, I tell you
fairly, one I will have if I knock your rickety old door to pieces."

"I have no light to give you."

"Oh, bother and nonsense! If you have no candle burning you must have
the means of lighting one. Nobody is without a few lucifer matches, be
they ever so poor. Do you or do you not choose to give me a light?"

"I beg of you to go away."

"You don't choose to open your door, then? Once,--twice,--mind, I will
have it."

"I request you to quit my door immediately, or I will call for
assistance."

"Once,--twice,--thrice,--you will not? Well, then, here goes! Now I'll
smash your old timbers, into morsels too small for you to pick up.
Hu!--hu!--hallo! Well done! Bravo!"

And suiting the action to the word, the ruffian assailed the door so
furiously that he quickly drove it in, the miserable lock with which it
was furnished having speedily broken to pieces.

The two women shrieked loudly; Madame de Fermont, in spite of her
weakness, rushed forward to meet the ruffian at the moment when he was
entering the room, and stopped him.

"Sir, this is most shameful; you must not enter here," exclaimed the
unhappy mother, keeping the door closed as well as she could. "I will
call for help." And she shuddered at the sight of this man, with his
hideous and drunken countenance.

"What's all this? What's all this?" said he. "Oughtn't neighbours to be
obliging? You ought to have opened; I shouldn't have broken anything."

Then with the stupid obstinacy of intoxication, he added, reeling on his
tottering legs:

"I wanted to come in, and I will come in; and I won't go out until I've
lighted my pipe."

"I have neither fire nor matches. In heaven's name, sir, do go away."

"That's not true. You tell me that I may not see the little girl who's
in bed. Yesterday you stopped up all the holes in the door. She's a
pretty chick, and I should like to see her. So mind, or I shall hurt you
if you don't let me enter quietly. I tell you I will see the little girl
in her bed, and I will light my pipe, or I'll smash everything before
me, and you into the bargain."

"Help, help, help!" exclaimed Madame de Fermont, who felt the door
yielding before the broad shoulders of the Gros-Boiteux.

Alarmed by her cries, the man retreated a step; and clenching his fist
at Madame de Fermont, he said:

"You shall pay me for this, mind. I will come back to-night and wring
your tongue out, and then you can't squall out."

And the Gros-Boiteux, as he was called at the Isle du Ravageur, went
down the staircase, uttering horrible threats.

Madame de Fermont, fearing that he might return, and seeing that the
lock was broken, dragged the table across the room, in order to
barricade it. Claire had been so alarmed, so agitated, at this horrible
scene, that she had fallen on her bed almost senseless, and overcome by
a nervous attack. Her mother, forgetting her own fears, ran to her,
embraced her, gave her a little water to drink, and by her caresses and
attentions revived her. When she saw her gradually recovering she said
to her:

"Calm yourself; don't be alarmed, my dearest child, this wicked man has
gone." Then the unfortunate mother exclaimed, in a tone of indescribable
indignation and grief, "And it is that notary who is the first cause of
all our sufferings."

Claire looked about her with as much astonishment as fear.

"Take courage, my child," said Madame de Fermont, embracing her
tenderly; "the wretch has gone."

"Oh, mamma, if he should come back again! You see, though you cried so
loud for help, no one came. Oh, pray let us leave this house, or I shall
die with fear!"

"How you tremble; you are quite in a fever."

"No, no," said the young girl, to reassure her mother, "it is
nothing--only fright,--and that will soon pass away. And you,--how do
you feel? Give me your hands. Oh, how they burn! It is, indeed, you who
are suffering; and you try to conceal it from me!"

"Don't think so; I feel better than I did. It is only the fright that
man caused me which makes me so. I was sleeping soundly in my chair,
and only awoke when you did."

"Yet, mamma, your poor eyes look so red and inflamed!"

"Why, you see, my dear, one does not sleep so refreshingly in a chair."

"And you really do not suffer?"

"No, no, I assure you. And you?"

"Nor I either. I only tremble with fear. Pray, mamma, let us leave this
house!"

"And where shall we go to? You know what trouble we had to find this
miserable chamber; for, unfortunately, we have no papers,--and, besides,
we have paid a fortnight in advance. They will not return our money; and
we have so very, very little left, that we must take all possible care
of it."

"Perhaps M. de Saint-Remy will answer you in a day or two."

"I cannot hope for that. It is so long since I wrote to him."

"He cannot have received your letter. Why did not you write to him
again? From here to Angers is not so far, and we should soon have his
answer."

"My poor child, you know how much that has cost me already!"

"But there's no risk; and he is so good in spite of his roughness.
Wasn't he one of the oldest friends of my father? And then he is a
relation of ours."

"But he is poor himself,--his fortune is very small. Perhaps he does not
reply to us that he may avoid the pain of a refusal."

"But he may not have received your letter, mamma!"

"And if he has received it, my dear,--one of two things, either he is
himself in too painful a position to come to our aid, or he feels no
interest in us. What, then, is the use of exposing ourselves to a
refusal or humiliation?"

"Come, come, courage, mamma; we have still a hope left. Perhaps this
very morning will bring us a kind answer."

"From M. d'Orbigny?"

"Yes; the letter of which you had made the rough copy was so simple and
touching. It showed our miserable condition so naturally that he will
have pity on us. Really, I don't know why, but something tells me you
are wrong to despair of him."

"He has so little motive for taking any interest in us. It is true he
formerly knew your father, and I have often heard my poor brother speak
of M. d'Orbigny as a man with whom he was on good terms before the
latter left Paris to retire into the country with his young wife."

"It is that which makes me hope. He has a young wife, and she will be
compassionate. And then in the country one can do so much good. He will
take you, I should think, as a housekeeper, and I could work in the
needle-room. Then M. d'Orbigny is very rich, and in a great house there
is always so much to do."

"Yes; but we have so little claim on his kind interest!"

"We are so unfortunate!"

"It is true that is a claim in the eyes of charitably disposed persons."

"Let us hope that M. d'Orbigny and his wife are so."

"Then if we do not have any or an unfavorable answer from him, I will
overcome my false shame, and write to the Duchesse de Lucenay."

"The lady of whom M. de Saint-Remy has spoken so often, and whose
kindness and generosity he so much, praised?"

"The same,--daughter of the Prince de Noirmont. He knew her when she was
very young, and treated her almost always as if she were his own child,
for he was on terms of the closest intimacy with the prince. Madame de
Lucenay must have many acquaintances, and, no doubt, could easily find
situations for us."

"No doubt, mamma. But I understand your delicacy; you do not know her,
whilst, at least, my father and my uncle both knew a little of M.
d'Orbigny."

"Well, but in case Madame de Lucenay cannot do anything for us, I have
still another resource."

"What is that, mamma?"

"A very poor one,--a very weak hope, perhaps. But why should I not try
it? M. de Saint-Remy's son is--"

"Has M. de Saint-Remy a son?" exclaimed Claire, interrupting her mother
with great astonishment.

"Yes, my dear, he has a son."

"Yet he never spoke of him when he used to come to Angers."

"True, and, for reasons which you cannot understand, M. de Saint-Remy,
having quitted Paris fifteen years ago, has not seen his son since that
period."

"Fifteen years without seeing his father! Is that possible?"

"Alas, yes! As you see, the son of M. de Saint-Remy, being very much
sought after in society, and very rich--"

"Very rich, whilst his father is poor?"

"All young M. de Saint-Remy's wealth came from his mother."

"What of that,--how could he leave his father?"

"His father would not accept anything from him."

"Why?"

"That is a question to which I cannot reply, my dear child; but I have
heard it said by my poor brother that this young man was reputed vastly
generous. Young and generous, he ought to be good. Learning from me that
my husband had been his father's intimate friend, perhaps he will
interest himself in trying to find us work or employment. He has such
high and extensive connections, that this would be no trouble to him."

"And then, perhaps, too, we could learn from him if M. de Saint-Remy,
his father, had not quitted Angers before you wrote to him: that would
account for his silence."

"I think, my dear, that M. de Saint-Remy has not kept up any connection
with--Still, we cannot but try."

"Unless M. d'Orbigny replies to you favourably, and I repeat, I don't
know why, but I have hopes, in spite of myself."

"It is now many days, my dear, since I wrote to him, telling him all the
causes of our misfortunes, and yet to this time we have no reply,--none.
A letter put in the post before four o'clock in the evening reaches
Aubiers next morning, and thus we might have had his answer five days
ago."

"Perhaps, before he replies, he is considering in what way he can best
be useful to us."

"May Heaven hear thee, my child!"

"It appears to me plain enough, mamma, if he could not do anything for
us, he could have written at once, and said so."

"Unless he will do nothing."

"Oh, mamma, is that possible? to refuse to answer us, and leave us in
hope for four days--eight days, perhaps; for when one is miserable we
always hope."

"Alas, my child, there is sometimes so much indifference for the
miseries persons have never known!"

"But your letter--"

"My letter cannot give him any idea of our actual disquietude, our
constant sufferings; my letter will not depict to him our unhappy life,
our constant humiliations, our existence in this horrid house,--the
fright we have but this instant experienced. My letter will not describe
the horrible future which is in store for us, if--But, my love, do not
let us talk of that. You tremble,--you are cold."

"No, mamma, don't mind me; but tell me, suppose all fails us, the
little money we have in the box is spent,--is it possible that, in a
city as rich as Paris, we shall both die of hunger and misery--for want
of work, and because a wicked man has taken from you all you had in the
world?"

"Oh, be silent, my unfortunate child!"

"But really, mamma, is it possible?"

"Alas!"

"But God, who knows all, who can do all, will he abandon us, who have
never offended him?"

"I entreat you, my dearest girl, do not give way to these distressing
ideas. I would prefer seeing you hope, without great reason, either.
Come, come, comfort me rather with your consoling ideas; I am but too
apt to be discouraged, as you well know."

"Yes, yes, let us hope, that is best. No doubt the porter's nephew will
return to-day from the _Poste-Restante_ with a letter. Another errand to
pay out of your little stock, and through my fault. If I had not been so
weak yesterday and to-day we should have gone to the post-office
ourselves, as we did the day before yesterday; but you will not leave me
here alone and go yourself."

"How could I, my dear? Only think, just now, that horrid man who burst
open the door! Suppose you had been alone?"

"Oh, mamma, pray don't talk of it; it quite frightens me only to think
of it."

At this moment some one knocked suddenly at the door.

"Heaven, it is he again!" exclaimed Madame de Fermont, still under her
first fears; and she pushed the table against the door with all her
strength. Her fears ceased when she heard the voice of Father Micou:

"Madame, my nephew, André, has come from the _Poste-Restante_. He has
brought a letter with an 'X' and a 'Z.' It comes a long way; there are
eight sous for postage, and commission makes twenty sous."

"Mamma, a letter from the country,--we are saved! It is from M. de
Saint-Remy or M. d'Orbigny. Poor mother! You will not suffer any more;
you will no longer be uneasy about me, you will be so happy! God is
just! God is good!" exclaimed the young girl, and a ray of hope lighted
up her mild and lovely face.

"Oh, sir, thank you; give it to me quickly!" said Madame de Fermont,
moving the table as well as she could, and half opening the door.

"Twenty sous," said the man, giving her the anxiously desired letter.

"I will pay you, sir."

"Oh, madame, there's no hurry, I am going up higher; in ten minutes I
shall be down again, and can call for the money as I pass."

"The letter is from Normandy, with the postmark of 'Les Aubiers.' It is
from Madame d'Orbigny!" exclaimed Madame de Fermont, examining the
address, "To Madame X. Z., _Poste-Restante_, à Paris."

"Well, mamma, am I right? Oh, how my heart beats!"

"Our good or bad fate is in it," said Madame de Fermont; and twice her
trembling hand was extended to break the seal; she had not courage.

How can we describe the terrible agony to which they are a prey who,
like Madame de Fermont, expect a letter which brings them either hope or
despair? The burning, fevered excitement of the player whose last pieces
of gold are hazarded on a card, and who, breathless, with inflamed eye,
awaits for a decisive cast which brings his ruin or his fortune,--this
emotion, violent as it is, may perhaps give some idea of the painful
anguish of which we speak. In a second the soul is elevated to the most
radiant hope or relapses into the most mortal discouragement. According
as he hopes to be aided, or fears to be refused, the unhappy wretch
suffers in turn emotions of a most contrary nature,--unutterable
feelings of happiness and gratitude to the generous heart which pities
his miserable condition--bitter and intense resentment against selfish
indifference!

When it is a question of deserving sufferers, those who give often would
perhaps give always, and those who always refuse would perhaps give
frequently, if they knew or saw that the hope of benevolent aid or the
fear of a haughty refusal--that their decision, indeed--can excite all
that is distressing or encouraging in the hearts of their petitioners.

"What weakness!" said Madame de Fermont, with a deep sigh, seating
herself by her daughter; "once again, my poor Claire, our destiny is in
this envelope; I burn with anxiety to know its contents, and yet I dare
not read it. If it be a refusal, alas, it will be soon enough!"

"And if it be a promise of assistance, then, mamma--If this poor little
letter contain consoling words, which shall assure us for the future, by
promising us a humble employment in the establishment of M. d'Orbigny,
every moment lost is a moment of happiness lost,--is it not?"

"Yes, my love; but on the other hand--"

"No, mamma, you are mistaken; I told you that M. d'Orbigny had only
delayed so long that he might mention something certain to you. Let me
see the letter, mamma. I am sure I can guess if it is good or bad by the
writing. And I am sure," said Claire, looking at the letter, "that it is
a kind and generous hand, accustomed to execute benevolence towards
those who suffer."

"I entreat you, Claire, not to give way to vain hopes; for, if you do, I
shall not have the courage to open the letter."

"My dear mother, without opening it, I can tell you almost word for word
what it contains. Listen: 'Madame,--Your fate and that of your daughter
are so worthy of interest, that I beg you will come to me, in case you
should like to undertake the superintendence of my house.'"

"Pray, my dearest, I beseech you, do not give way to vain hopes; the
disappointment would be terrible!" said Madame de Fermont, taking the
letter.

"Come, dear mamma," said Claire, smiling, and excited by one of those
feelings of certainty so natural to her age, "give me the letter; I have
courage to read it!"

"No," said Madame de Fermont, "I will read it! It is from the Comtesse
d'Orbigny."

"So much the better," replied Claire.

"We shall see." And Madame de Fermont read as follows in a trembling
voice:

      "'MADAME:--M. the Comte d'Orbigny, who has been a great invalid
    for some time, could not reply to you during my absence--'"

"You see, mamma, it was no one's fault."

"Listen, listen!

    "'On arriving from Paris this morning, I hasten to write to you,
    madame, after having discussed your letter with M. d'Orbigny. He
    recollects but very indistinctly the intimacy you allude to as
    having subsisted between him and your brother. As to the name of
    your husband, madame, it is not unknown to M. d'Orbigny; but he
    cannot recall to mind under what circumstances he has heard it.
    The spoliation of which you so unhesitatingly accuse M. Jacques
    Ferrand, whom we have the happiness to call our solicitor, is,
    in the eyes of M. d'Orbigny, a cruel calumny, whose effects you
    have by no means calculated upon. My husband, as well as myself,
    madame, know and admire the extreme probity of the respectable
    and pious individual whom you so blindly assail; and I am
    compelled to tell you, madame, that M. d'Orbigny, whilst he
    regrets the painful situation in which you are placed, and the
    real cause of which it is not his business to find out, feels it
    impossible to afford you the assistance requested. Accept,
    madame, with the expression of M. d'Orbigny's regrets, my best
    compliments.

                                       "'COMTESSE D'ORBIGNY.'"

The mother and daughter looked at each other perfectly stupefied, and
incapable of uttering a word. Father Micou rapped at the door, and said:

"Madame, may I come in for the postage and commission? It's twenty
sous."

"Ah, true, such good news is worth a sum on which we exist for two
days," said Madame de Fermont, with a bitter smile, laying the letter
down on her daughter's bed, and going towards an old trunk without a
lock, to which she stooped down and opened. "We are robbed!" exclaimed
the unhappy woman, with alarm. "Nothing--not a sou left!" she added, in
a mournful voice; and, overwhelmed, she supported herself on the trunk.

"What do you say, mamma,--the bag with the money in it?"

But Madame de Fermont, rising suddenly, opened the room door, and,
addressing the receiver, who was on the landing-place:

"Sir," she said, whilst her eyes sparkled, and her cheeks were flushed
with indignation and alarm, "I had a bag of silver in this trunk; it was
stolen from me, no doubt, the day before yesterday, when I went out for
an hour with my daughter. The money must be restored, I tell you,--you
are responsible for it!"

"You've been robbed! That's false, I know. My house is respectable,"
said the fellow, in an insolent and brutal tone; "you only say that in
order not to pay me my postage and commission."

"I tell you, sir, that this money was all I possessed in the world; it
has been stolen from me, and I must have it found and restored, or I
will lodge an information. Oh, I will conceal nothing--I will respect
nothing--I tell you!"

"Very fine, indeed! You who have got no papers. Go and lay your
information,--go at once. Why don't you? I defy you, I do!"

The wretched woman was thunderstruck. She could not go out and leave
her daughter alone, confined to her bed as she was by the fright the
Gros-Boiteux had occasioned her in the morning, and particularly after
the threats with which the receiver of stolen goods had menaced her. He
added:

"This is a fudge! You'd as much a bag of silver there as a bag of gold.
Will you pay me for the letter,--will you or won't you? Well, it's just
the same to me. When you go by my door, I'll snatch off your old black
shawl from your shoulders. It's a precious shabby one; but I daresay I
can make twenty sous out of it."

"Oh, sir," exclaimed Madame de Fermont, bursting into tears, "I beseech
you have pity upon us! This small sum is all we possess, my daughter and
I, and, that stolen, we have nothing left--nothing--I say nothing,
but--to die of starvation!"

"What can I do? If it's true that you have been robbed, and of silver,
too (which appears to me very unlikely), why, the silver has been melted
long since, rely on it."

"_Mon Dieu! Mon Dieu!_"

"The chap who did the trick was not so soft, rely on it, as to mark the
pieces, and keep 'em here, to lead to his own detection. Supposing it's
any one in the house, which I don't believe (for, as I was a-saying this
morning to the uncle of the lady on the first floor, this is really a
village), if any one has robbed you, it is a pity. You may lay a hundred
informations, but you won't recover a centime. You won't do any good by
that, I tell you, and you may believe me. Well, but I say--" exclaimed
the receiver, stopping short, and seeing Madame de Fermont stagger.
"What's the matter? How pale you are! Mademoiselle, your mother's taken
ill!" added Micou, just advancing in time to catch the unhappy mother,
who, overcome by this last shock, felt her senses forsake her,--the
forced energy which had supported her so long failed before this fresh
blow.

"Mother, dear, oh, what ails you?" exclaimed Claire, still in her bed.

The receiver, still vigorous in spite of his fifty years, seized with a
momentary feeling of pity, took Madame de Fermont in his arms, pushed
the door open with his knee, and, entering the chamber, said:

"Your pardon, mademoiselle, for entering whilst you are in bed, but I
was obliged to bring in your mother; she has fainted, but it won't last
long."

On seeing the man enter, Claire shrieked loudly, and the unhappy girl
hid herself as well as she could under the bedclothes. The huckster
seated Madame de Fermont in a chair beside the bed, and then went out,
leaving the door ajar, for the Gros-Boiteux had broken the lock.

       *       *       *       *       *

One hour after this last shock, the violent malady which had so long
hung over and threatened Madame de Fermont had developed itself. A prey
to a burning fever and to fearful delirium, the unhappy woman was placed
beside her daughter, who, horror-struck, aghast, alone, and almost as
ill as her mother, had neither money nor recourse, and was in an agony
of fear every moment lest the ruffian who lodged on the same floor
should enter the apartment.




CHAPTER IX.

THE RUE DE CHAILLOT.


We will precede M. Badinot by some hours, as in haste he proceeded from
the Passage de la Brasserie to the Vicomte de Saint-Remy. The latter, as
we have said, lived in the Rue de Chaillot, and occupied a delightful
small house, built between the court and the garden in this quarter, so
solitary, although so close to the Champs Elysées, the most fashionable
promenade in Paris.

It is useless to enumerate the advantages which M. de Saint-Remy, who
was decidedly a man _à bonnes fortunes_, derived from the position of a
residence so sagaciously selected. We will only say that a gentleman (or
a lady) could enter very privately by a small door in the large garden
which opened into a back lane absolutely deserted, communicating from
the Rue Marboeuf to the Rue de Chaillot. By wonderful chance, one of the
finest nursery-grounds in Paris having also in this quiet passage a way
out that was little frequented, the mysterious visitors of M. de
Saint-Remy, in case of a surprise or sudden rencounter, were armed with
a most plausible and bucolical excuse for their visit to the lonely
alley: they were there (they might say if they pleased) to choose some
rare flowers from the celebrated gardener who was so renowned for the
beauty of his conservatories. The visitors need only thus tell half
falsehoods; for the vicomte, plentifully imbued with all the tastes of
most costly luxuries, had a delightful greenhouse, which extended along
the side of the alley we have alluded to. The small private door opened
on this delightful winter garden, which terminated in a boudoir (forgive
the superannuated expression), which was on the ground floor of the
house.

We may say, therefore, without metaphor, that a female who passed this
dangerous threshold, to enter M. de Saint-Remy's house, ran to her ruin
through a flowery path; for, in the winter particularly, this lonely
alley was bordered with real bushes of bright and perfumed flowers.
Madame de Lucenay, jealous as a woman deeply in love always is, had
demanded the key of this small door.

If we dwell somewhat on the general aspect of this dwelling, it is that
it reflected (if we may be allowed the expression) one of those
degrading existences which from day to day become happily more rare, but
which it may be as well to note down as one of the peculiarities of the
epoch.

The interior of M. de Saint-Remy's house presented (viewed in this
light) a curious appearance, or rather the house was separated into two
distinct zones,--the ground floor, where he received his female
visitors; the first story, where he received his gambling companions or
his dinner or hunting associates; in a word, what he called his friends.
Thus on the ground floor was a bedchamber, which was nothing but gold,
mirrors, flowers, satin, and lace; then a small music-room, in which was
a harp and piano (M. de Saint-Remy was an excellent musician); a cabinet
of pictures; and then the boudoir, which communicated with the
conservatory; a dining-room for two persons, who were served and passed
away the dishes and plates by a turning window; a bath-room, a model of
luxury and Oriental refinement; and, close at hand, a small library, a
portion of which was arranged after the catalogue of that which La
Mettrie had collected for Frederic the Great. Such was this apartment.

It would be unavailing to say that all these rooms, furnished with
exquisite taste, and with a Sardanapalian luxury, had as ornaments
Watteaus little known; Bouchers never engraved; wanton subjects,
formerly purchased at enormous prices. There were, besides, groups
modelled in terra-cotta, by Clodien, and here and there, on plinths of
jasper or antique breccia, some rare copies, in white marble, of the
most jovial and lovely bacchanals of the Secret Museum of Naples.

Add to this, in summer there were in perspective the green recesses of a
well-planted garden, lonely, replete with flowers and birds, watered by
a small and sparkling fountain, which, before it spread itself on the
verdant turf, fell from a black and shaggy rock, scintillated like a
strip of silver gauze, and dashed into a clear basin like
mother-of-pearl, where beautiful white swans wantoned with grace and
freedom.

Then, when the mild and serene night came on, what shade, what perfume,
what silence, was there in those odorous clumps, whose thick foliage
served as a dais for the rustic seats formed of reeds and Indian mats.

During the winter, on the contrary, except the glass door which opened
to the hothouse, all was kept close shut. The transparent silk of the
blinds, the net lace of the curtains, made the daylight still more
mysterious. On all the pieces of furniture large tufts of exotic plants
seemed to put forth their large flowers, resplendent with gold and
enamel.

In order to do the honours of this temple, which seemed raised to
antique Love, or the denuded divinities of Greece, behold a man, young,
handsome, elegant, and distinguished,--by turns witty and tender,
romantic or libertine; now jesting and gay to folly, now full of charm
and grace; an excellent musician, gifted with one of those impassioned,
vibrating voices which women cannot hear without experiencing a deep
impression, almost physical,--in fact, a man essentially made for
love,--such was the vicomte. In Athens, no doubt, he would have been
admired, exalted, deified, as was Alcibiades; in our days, and at the
period of which we write, the vicomte was nothing more than a base
forger, a contemptible swindler.

The first story of M. de Saint-Remy's house was exceedingly masculine in
its whole appearance. It was there he received his many friends, all of
whom were of the very highest society. There was nothing effeminate,
nothing coquettish. The furniture was plain, but elegant, the ornaments
being first-rate weapons of all sorts, pictures of race-horses, who had
won for the vicomte a great number of magnificent gold and silver vases,
which were placed on the tables and sideboards.

The smoking-room and play-room were closed by a cheerful dining-room,
where eight persons (the number to which the guests were rigidly
confined when there was a first-class dinner) had often appreciated the
excellence of the cook, and the no less high merit of the wine of the
vicomte, before they faced him at some high game of whist for five or
six hundred louis, or shook the noisy dice-box at infernal hazard or
roulette.

These two widely opposite shades of M. de Saint-Remy disclosed, the
reader will follow us into the regions below, to the very comfortable
apartment of Edwards Patterson, the master of the horse of M. de
Saint-Remy, who had invited M. Boyer to breakfast. A very pretty English
maid-servant having withdrawn after she had brought in the silver
teapot, these two worthies remained alone.

Edwards was about forty years of age, and never did more skilful or
stouter coachman make a seat groan under his most imposing rotundity;
never did powdered wig enclose a more rubicund visage; and never did a
more knowing and competent driver hold in his four fingers and thumb the
reins of a four-in-hand. As good a judge of a horse as Tattersal (and in
his youth he had been as good a trainer as the old and celebrated
Chiffney), Edwards had been to the vicomte a most excellent coachman,
and a man perfectly capable of superintending the training of
race-horses on which he had betted heavily.

When he did not assume his sumptuous brown and silver livery on the
emblazoned hammercloth of his box, Edwards very much resembled an honest
English farmer; and it is under this aspect that we shall present him to
the reader, adding, at the same time, that beneath this round and red
visage there lurked all the pitiless and devilish cunning of the
horse-dealer.

M. Boyer, his guest, the confidential servant of the vicomte, was a
tall, thin man, with gray, smooth hair, bald forehead, cunning glance,
with a countenance calm, discreet, and reserved. He expressed himself in
somewhat choice phraseology, with polite, easy manners; he was tolerably
well informed, his political opinions being legitimist, and he could
take his part as first violin in an amateur quartette. From time to
time, and with the best air in the world, he took a pinch of snuff from
a gold snuff-box, set around with fine pearls, after which he
negligently shook with the back of his hand (as white and carefully
attended to as his master's) the particles of snuff from the frill of
his fine Holland shirt.

"Do you know, my dear Edwards," said Boyer, "that your maid, Betty,
really does your meals in a very fair manner! _Ma foi!_ now and then one
gets tired of high living."

"The fact is that Betty is a very good girl," said Edwards, who spoke
very good French. "I shall take her with me into my establishment, if I
make up my mind to set up in housekeeping; and on this point, since we
are alone, my dear Boyer, let us talk of business matters which you know
as well as I do."

"Why, yes, tolerably," said Boyer, modestly taking a pinch of snuff,
"one learns them so naturally, when they are the affairs of others that
occupy us."

"I want your advice on a very important point, and that's the reason I
have begged you to come and take a cup of tea with me."

"I'm at your service, my dear Edwards."

"You know that, besides the race-horses, I had an agreement with M. le
Vicomte to the complete providing of his stable, horses, and men, that
is to say, eight horses and five or six grooms and boys, for twenty-four
thousand francs (nine thousand guineas) a year, including my wages."

"That was moderate enough."

"For four years M. le Vicomte paid me very regularly; but about the
middle of last year he said to me, 'Edwards, I owe you about twenty-four
thousand francs. What value, at the lowest, do you set on my horses and
carriages?' 'Monsieur le Vicomte, the eight horses ought to fetch three
thousand francs (120_l._) each, one with another, and that would make
(and it's true, Boyer, for the pair of phaeton horses cost five hundred
guineas) exactly twenty-four thousand francs for the horses. As to the
carriages, there are four, let us say, for twelve thousand francs; that,
added to the twenty-four thousand francs for the horses, makes
thirty-six thousand francs.' 'Well,' replied the vicomte, 'buy the whole
of me at that price, on condition that for the twelve thousand francs
which you will owe me, paid as it were in advance, you shall keep and
place at my disposal horses, servants, and carriages for six months.'"

"And you very wisely acceded to the proposal, Edwards? It was a golden
gain to you."

"No doubt. In another fortnight the six months will have expired, and I
become proprietor of the horses and carriages."

"Nothing plainer. The agreement was drawn up by M. Badinot, the
vicomte's man of business, what do you want with my advice?"

"What should I do? To sell the horses and carriages in consequence of M.
le Vicomte's departure? All would sell well, as he is known as one of
the first judges in Paris; or ought I to set up as a horse-dealer with
my stud, which would make a capital beginning? What is your
opinion--your advice?"

"I advise you to do what I shall do myself."

"In what way?"

"I am in the same position as yourself."

"You?"

"M. le Vicomte detests details. When I entered in his service I had, by
savings and inheritance, sixty thousand francs (2,400_l._). I paid the
expenses of the house as you did of the stables; and every year M. le
Vicomte paid me without examining my account. At nearly the same time as
yourself I found myself out of pocket about twenty thousand francs on my
own account, and, to the tradespeople, sixty thousand francs. Then M. le
Vicomte made me the same proposition as to yourself, in order to
reimburse me. I was to sell the furniture of the house, including the
plate, which is very handsome, very fine paintings, etc., the whole
estimated at a hundred and forty thousand francs (5,600_l._). There were
eighty thousand francs to pay, and there remained sixty thousand francs
which I was to disburse until they were quite exhausted, in the expenses
of the table, the servants' wages, etc., and in nothing else. These were
the terms of the agreement."

"Because on that outlay you have a profit."

"As a matter of course; for I made all the agreements with the
tradespeople, whom I shall not pay until after the sale," said Boyer,
taking a huge pinch of snuff; "so that at the end of this month--"

"The furniture is yours, as the horses and carriages are mine."

"Precisely so. M. le Vicomte has gained by this, by living for the last
few months as he likes to live, _en grand seigneur_,--and that in the
very teeth of his creditors; for furniture, plate, horses, carriages,
which had all been paid for ready money when he came of age, have now
become the property of yourself and myself."

"And so M. le Vicomte is really ruined?"

"In five years."

"And M. le Vicomte inherited--"

"Only a miserable million (40,000_l._), ready money," said M. Boyer,
with a disdainful air, and taking a pinch of snuff. "Add to this two
hundred thousand francs of debts (8,000_l._), about--that's pretty well!
It was, therefore, to tell you, my dear Edwards, that I had an intention
of letting this house, so admirably furnished as it is, to some English
family, linen, glass, china, silver, conservatory. Some of your
country-people would pay a good rent for it?"

"Unquestionably. Why don't you do so?"

"Why, there's considerable risk, and so I make up my mind to sell the
whole at once. M. le Vicomte is also known as a connoisseur in
first-class furniture and objects of art, so that anything that he has
selected will always fetch double its value, and I am safe to realise a
large sum. Do as I do, Edwards, and realise--realise. Don't risk your
profits in speculation. You, first coachman of M. le Vicomte de
Saint-Remy,--why, there'll be a competition for you. And yesterday I
just heard of a minor who has recently been emancipated, a cousin of
Madame la Duchesse de Lucenay, the young Duc de Montbrison, who has just
arrived from Italy with his tutor, and is forming his establishment. Two
hundred and fifty thousand livres of income (10,000_l._) from land, my
dear Edwards, two hundred and fifty thousand livres a year,--just
entering into life,--twenty years of age only,--with all the illusions
of simple confidence, and all the desires of expenditure,--prodigal as a
prince. I know the steward; and I tell you, in confidence, he has all
but concluded with me as first _valet de chambre_. He patronises
me,--the fool!" And M. Boyer shrugged his shoulders, whilst he inhaled
another large pinch of snuff.

"You hope to get rid of him?"

"_Parbleu_, he is a jackanapes,--an ass! He places me there as if he
ought not to have any fears of me. Before two months I shall be in his
place."

"Two hundred and fifty thousand livres a year in land!" replied Edwards,
reflecting; "and a young man! It is a good house?"

"I tell you there is everything to make a man comfortable. I will speak
to my protector for you," said M. Boyer, with irony. "Take the place; it
is a fortune which has roots to it, and one may hold on by it for a long
time. It is not like the unfortunate million of M. le Vicomte, a
snowball, and nothing else,--a ray of a Parisian sun, and that's all. I
soon saw that I should only be a bird of passage here. It's a pity, for
the establishment did us credit; and, to the last moment, I will serve
M. le Vicomte with the respect and esteem due to him."

"_Ma foi_, my dear Boyer, I thank you, and accept your proposition. And,
now I think of it, suppose I were to propose the stud of M. le Vicomte
to this young duke! It is all ready, and known and admired all over
Paris."

"True, you may make a profitable affair of it."

"And you, why don't you propose to him this house so admirably fitted up
in every way? What could he find better?"

"Bravo! Edwards, you are a man of sense decidedly; you have suggested a
most excellent idea. We must ask the vicomte; he is such a good master
that he will not refuse to speak for us to the young duke. He may say
that, as he is going on the legation of Gerolstein, to which he is
attached, he wishes to get rid of his whole establishment. Let us see.
One hundred and sixty thousand francs for the house furnished, twenty
thousand francs for plate and pictures, fifty thousand francs for
stable and carriages, that makes two hundred and thirty thousand francs;
and it is a bargain for a young man who wishes to be set up at once in
the first style."

"And the horses!"

"And the capital table! Gallefroi, his cook, will leave a hundred times
better off than when he came here first. M. le Vicomte has given him
capital instruction,--has regularly refined him!"

"They say, too, that M. le Vicomte is such a capital player?"

"Admirable! Gaining large sums with even more indifference than he loses
them! And yet I never saw any one lose with better taste!"

"And the women, Boyer,--the women! Ah, you could tell a tale! You have
the sole _entrée_ to the apartments of the ground floor--"

"I have my secrets as you have yours, my dear fellow."

"Mine?"

"When M. le Vicomte ran his horses, had you not your confidences? I will
not attack the honesty of the jockeys of your opponents; but there were
reports--"

"Hush, my dear Boyer, a gentleman never compromises the reputation of a
jockey who is against him, and has the weakness to listen--"

"Then a gallant never compromises the reputation of a woman who has been
kind to him. So, I say, let's keep our secrets, or, rather, the secrets
of M. le Vicomte, my dear Edwards."

"Ah, good! What will he do now?"

"He is going to Germany in a good travelling carriage, with seven or
eight thousand francs, which he knows when to lay his hand upon. Oh, I
have no fears for the vicomte! He is one of those personages who always
fall on their feet, as they say."

"And he has no future expectancies?"

"None; for his father has nothing but just enough to live upon."

"His father?"

"Certainly."

"M. le Vicomte's father is not dead?"

"He was not dead five or six months ago when M. le Vicomte wrote to him
for some family papers."

"But we never see him here?"

"For reasons good. For fifteen years he has resided in the country at
Angers."

"But M. le Vicomte never visits him?"

"His father?"

"Yes."

"Never--never!"

"Have they quarrelled, then?"

"What I am going to tell you is no secret, for I have it from the old
man of business of M. the Prince de Noirmont."

"Father of Madame de Lucenay?" said Edwards, with a knowing glance at
Boyer, who, appearing not to understand him, replied coolly:

"Madame la Duchesse de Lucenay is the daughter of M. the Prince de
Noirmont. The father of M. le Vicomte was bosom friend of the prince.
Madame la Duchesse was then very young, and M. de Saint-Remy, senior,
who was very fond of her, treated her as if she were his own child. I
learnt these details from Simon, the prince's man of business; and I may
speak unhesitatingly, for the adventure I am about to narrate to you
was, at the time, the talk of all Paris. In spite of his sixty years,
the father of M. le Vicomte is a man of iron disposition, with the
courage of a lion, of probity which I call almost fabulous. He had
scarcely any property of his own, and had married the vicomte's mother
for love. She was a young person of good fortune, possessing about a
million of francs, at the melting of which we have had the honour to be
present." And M. Boyer bowed. Edwards imitated him.

"The marriage was a very happy one, until the moment when the father of
M. le Vicomte found--accidentally, as they say--some letters, which
proved that, during one of his absences three or four years after his
marriage, his wife had had an attachment for a certain Polish count."

"That often happens to these Poles. When I was at the Marquis de
Senneval's, the marquise, a regular she-devil--"

"My dear Edwards," interrupted M. Boyer, "you should learn the alliances
of our great families before you speak, or you will sadly blunder."

"How?"

"Madame la Marquise de Senneval is sister of M. le Duc de Montbrison,
into whose establishment you wish to enter."

"Ah, the devil!"

"Judge of the effect if you had spoken thus of her before tattling
people! You would not have remained in the house twenty-four hours."

"True, Boyer; I must endeavour to 'get up' my peerage."

"I resume. The father of M. le Vicomte discovered, after twelve or
fifteen years of a marriage very happy until then, that he had this
Polish count to complain of. Fortunately, or unfortunately, M. le
Vicomte was born nine months after his father, or rather M. le Comte de
Saint-Remy, had returned from this unpropitious journey, so that he
could not be certain, in spite of the greatest probabilities, whether or
not M. le Vicomte could fairly charge him with paternity. However, the
comte separated instantly from his wife, would not touch a stiver of the
fortune she had brought him, and returned into the country with about
eighty thousand francs which he possessed of his own. But you have yet
to learn the rancour of this diabolical character. Although the outrage
had been perpetrated fifteen years when he detected it, the father of M.
le Vicomte, accompanied by M. de Fermont, one of his relatives, sought
out this Polonese seducer, and found him at Venice, after having sought
for him during eighteen months in every city in Europe."

"What determination!"

"A demon's rancour, I say, my dear Edwards! At Venice there was a
ferocious duel, in which the Pole was killed. All passed off honourably;
but they tell me that, when the father of M. le Vicomte saw the Pole
fall at his feet mortally wounded, he exhibited such ferocious joy that
his relative, M. de Fermont, was obliged to take him away from the place
of combat; the comte wishing, as he declared, to see his enemy die
before his eyes."

"What a man! What a man!"

"The comte returned to Paris, saw his wife, told her he had killed the
Pole, and went back into the country. Since that time he never saw her
or her son, and resided at Angers, where he lived, as they say, like a
regular old wolf, with what was left of his eighty thousand francs,
which had been sweated down not a little, as you may suppose, by his
chase after the Pole. At Angers he saw no one, unless it were the wife
and daughter of his relative, M. de Fermont, who has been dead some
years now. Besides, it was an unfortunate family, for the brother of
Madame de Fermont blew his brains out some months ago."

"And the mother of M. le Vicomte?"

"He lost her a long time ago; that's the reason that, when he attained
his majority, M. le Vicomte came into his mother's fortune. So, you see,
my dear Edwards, that, as to inheritance, the vicomte has nothing, or
almost less than nothing, to expect from his father."

"Who, moreover, detests him."

[Illustration: _He exhibited such ferocious joy._
Original Etching by Mercier.]

"He never would see him after the discovery in question, being fully
persuaded, no doubt, that he is the son of the Pole."

The conversation of these two personages was interrupted by a gigantic
footman, elaborately powdered, although it was scarcely eleven o'clock.

"M. Boyer, M. le Vicomte has rung his bell twice," said the giant.

Boyer appeared immensely distressed at having apparently been
inattentive to his duty, rose hastily, and followed the footman with as
much haste and respect as if he had not been himself, in his proper
person, the proprietor of his master's house.




CHAPTER X.

THE COMTE DE SAINT-REMY.


It was about two hours after Boyer had left Edwards to go to M. de
Saint-Remy, when the father of the latter knocked at the door of the
house in the Rue de Chaillot.

M. de Saint-Remy, senior, was a tall man, still active and vigorous in
spite of his age. The extreme darkness of his complexion contrasted
singularly with the peculiar whiteness of his beard and hair; his thick
eyebrows still remained black, and half covered his piercing eyes deeply
sunk in his head. Although from a kind of misanthropic feeling he wore
clothes which were extremely shabby, yet there was in his entire
appearance something so calm and dignified as to inspire general
respect.

The door of his son's house opened, and he went in.

A porter in dress livery of brown and silver, with his hair carefully
powdered, and dressed in silk stockings, appeared on the threshold of an
elegant lodge, which resembled the smoky cave of the Pipelets as much as
does the tub of a stocking-darner the splendid shop of a fashionable
dressmaker.

"M. de Saint-Remy?" said the comte, in an abrupt tone.

The porter, instead of replying, scrutinised with impertinent curiosity
the white beard, the threadbare frock coat, and the napless hat of the
unknown, who held a stout cane in his hand.

"M. de Saint-Remy?" again said the comte, impatiently, and much
irritated at the insolent demeanour of the porter.

"M. le Vicomte is not at home."

So saying, the co-mate of M. Pipelet opened the door, and, with a
significant gesture, invited the unknown to retire.

"I will wait for him," said the comte, and he moved forward.

"Holloa! Come, I say, my friend, that's not the way people enter other
people's houses!" exclaimed the porter, running after the comte, and
taking him by the arm.

"What, fellow!" replied the old man, with a threatening air, and lifting
his cane, "dare you to lay your hands on me?"

"I dare do more than that if you do not be off quickly. I tell you the
vicomte is not within; so now go away, will you?"

At this moment Boyer, attracted by the sound of contending voices,
appeared on the steps which led to the house.

"What is the meaning of this noise?" he inquired.

"M. Boyer, it is this man, who will go into the house, although I have
told him that M. le Vicomte is not within."

"Hold your tongue!" said the comte. And then addressing Boyer, who had
come towards them, "I wish to see my son. He is out, and therefore I
will wait for him."

We have already said that Boyer was neither ignorant of the existence
nor the misanthropy of his master's father; and being, moreover, a
physiognomist, he did not for a moment doubt the comte's identity, but,
bowing respectfully, replied:

"If M. le Comte will follow me, I will conduct him--"

"Very well!" said M. de Saint-Remy, who followed Boyer, to the extreme
amazement of the porter.

Preceded by the _valet de chambre_, the comte reached the first story,
and followed his guide across the small sitting-room of Florestan de
Saint-Remy (we shall in future call the viscount by his baptismal name
to distinguish him more easily from his father) until they reached a
small antechamber communicating with the sitting-room, and sitting
immediately over the boudoir on the ground floor.

"M. le Vicomte was obliged to go out this morning," said Boyer. "If M.
le Comte will be so kind as to wait a little for him, he will not be
long before he comes in." And the _valet de chambre_ quitted the
apartment.

Left alone, the count looked about him with entire indifference; but
suddenly he started, his face became animated, his cheeks grew purple,
and anger agitated his features. His eyes had lighted on the portrait of
his wife, the mother of Florestan de Saint-Remy! He folded his arms
across his breast, bowed his head, as if to escape this sight, and
strode rapidly up and down the room.

"This is strange!" he said. "That woman is dead--I killed her lover--and
yet my wound is as deep, as sensitive, as the first day I received it;
my thirst of vengeance is not yet quenched; my savage misanthropy, which
has all but entirely isolated me from the world, has left me alone, and
in constant contemplation of the thought of my injury. Yes; for the
death of the accomplice of this infamy has avenged the outrage, but not
effaced its memory from my remembrance. Oh, yes! I feel that what
renders my hatred inextinguishable is the thought that, for fifteen
years, I was a dupe; that for fifteen years I treated with respect and
esteem a wretched woman who had infamously betrayed me; that I have
loved her son--the son of crime--as if he had indeed been my own child;
for the aversion with which Florestan now inspires me proves but too
clearly that he is the offspring of adultery! And yet I have not the
absolute conviction of his illegitimacy: it is just possible that he is
still my child! And sometimes that thought is agony to me! If he were
indeed my son! Then my abandonment of him, the coldness I have always
testified towards him, my constant refusals to see him, are
unpardonable. But, after all, he is rich, young, happy; and of what use
should I be to him? Yes; but then, perchance, his tenderness might have
soothed the bitter anguish which his mother has caused me!"

After a moment of deep reflection the comte shrugged his shoulders and
continued:

"Still these foolish suppositions, weak as useless, which revive all my
suffering! Let me be a man, and overcome the absurd and painful emotion
which I experience when I think that I am again about to see him whom,
for ten years, I have loved with the most mad idolatry,--whom I have
loved as my son; he--he--the son of the man whose blood I saw flow with
such intense joy! And they would not let me be present at his last
agony,--at his death! Ah, they know not what it was to have been
stricken as deeply as I was! Then, too, to think that my name--always
honoured and respected--should have been so often mentioned with scoff
and derision, as is always mentioned that of a wronged husband! To think
that my name--a name of which I had always been so proud--should now
belong to a man whose father's heart I could have plucked out! Ah, I
only wonder I do not go mad when I think of it!"

M. de Saint-Remy continued walking up and down in great agitation, and
mechanically lifted up the curtain which separated the apartment in
which he was from Florestan's private sitting-room, and advanced several
strides into that chamber.

He had disappeared for the moment, when a small door hidden in the
hangings of the wall opened softly, and Madame de Lucenay, wrapped in a
large green cashmere shawl, having a very plain black velvet bonnet on,
entered the salon, which the comte had but that instant quitted.

It is necessary to offer some explanation of this unexpected visit.

Florestan de Saint-Remy on the previous evening made an appointment with
the duchess for the next morning. She having, as we have said, a key of
the little gate in the narrow lane, had, as usual, entered by the
conservatory, relying on finding Florestan on the ground floor boudoir;
but, not finding him there, she believed (as had before occurred) that
the vicomte was engaged in his cabinet.

A secret staircase led from the boudoir to the story above. Madame de
Lucenay went up without hesitation, supposing that M. de Saint-Remy had
given orders, as usual, to be denied to everybody. Unluckily, a
threatening call from M. Badinot had compelled Florestan to go out
hastily, and he had forgotten his rendezvous with Madame de Lucenay.
She, not seeing any person, was about to enter the cabinet, when the
curtain was thrown on one side, and the duchess found herself confronted
with Florestan's father.

She could not repress a shriek.

"Clotilde!" exclaimed the comte, greatly astonished.

Intimately acquainted with the Prince de Noirmont, father of Madame de
Lucenay, M. de Saint-Remy had known her from her childhood, and, during
her girlhood, calling her, as he now did, by her baptismal name. The
duchess, motionless with surprise, continued gazing on the old man with
his white beard and mean attire, whose features she could not recall to
mind.

"You, Clotilde!" repeated the comte, in an accent of painful reproach;
"you here, in my son's house!"

These last words confirmed the vague reminiscence of Madame de Lucenay,
who then recognised Florestan's father, and said:

"M. de Saint-Remy?"

The position was so plain and declaratory that the duchess, whose
peculiar and resolute character is known to the reader, disdained to
have recourse to falsehood, in order to account for her appearance
there; and, relying on the really paternal affection which the comte had
always testified for her, she said to him, with that air at once
graceful, cordial, and decided, which was so peculiarly her own:

"Come, now, do not scold; you are my old, very old friend. Recollect you
called me your dear little Clotilde at least twenty years ago."

"Yes, I called you so then; but--"

"I know beforehand all you would say: you know my motto, 'What is, is
what will be.'"

"Oh, Clotilde!"

"Spare your reproaches, and let me rather express my extreme delight at
seeing you again: your presence reminds me of so many things,--my poor
dear father, in the first place, and then--heigho! my 'sweet fifteen!'
Oh, how delightful it is to be fifteen!"

"It is because your father was my friend that--"

"Oh, yes," said the duchess, interrupting M. de Saint-Remy, "he was so
very fond of you! You remember he always called you the man with the
green ribands, and you always told him, 'You spoil Clotilde; mind, I
tell you so;' and he replied, whilst he kissed me, 'I really do believe
I spoil her, and I must make all haste and double my spoiling, for very
soon the world will deprive me of her to spoil her in their turn.' Dear
father! What a friend I lost!" and a tear started to the lovely eyes of
Madame de Lucenay; then, extending her hand to M. de Saint-Remy, she said,
in a faltering voice, "But indeed, in truth, I am happy, very happy, to
see you again, you call up such precious remembrances,--memories so dear
to my heart!"

The comte, although he had long been acquainted with her original and
decisive disposition, was really amazed at the ease with which Clotilde
reconciled herself to her exceedingly delicate position, which was no
other than to meet her lover's father in her lover's house.

"If you have been in Paris for any time," continued Madame de Lucenay,
"it is very naughty of you not to have come and seen me before this; for
we should have had such long talks over the past; for you must know that
I have reached an age when there is an excessive pleasure in saying to
old friends, 'Don't you remember!'"

Assuredly the duchess could not have discoursed with more confirmed
tranquillity if she were receiving a morning visit at the Hôtel de
Lucenay. M. de Saint-Remy could not prevent himself from saying with
severity:

"Instead of talking of the past, it would be more fitting to discourse
of the present. My son is expected every instant, and--"

"No," said Clotilde, interrupting him, "I have the key of the little
door of the conservatory, and his arrival is always announced by a ring
of the bell when he returns by the principal entrance; and at that sound
I shall disappear as mysteriously as I arrived, and will leave you to
all your pleasure, at again seeing Florestan. What a delightful surprise
you will give him! For it is so long since you forsook him. Really, now
I think of it, it is I who have to reproach you."

"Me? Reproach me?"

"Assuredly. What guide, what aid had he, when he entered on the world?
whilst there are a thousand things for which a father's counsels are
indispensable. So, really and truly, it is very wrong of you--"

Here Madame de Lucenay, yielding to the whimsicality of her character,
could not help laughing most heartily, and saying to the comte:

"It must be owned that our position is at least an odd one, and that it
is very funny that it should be I who am sermonising you."

"Why, it does seem very strange to me, I assure you; but I deserve
neither your sermons nor your praises. I have come to my son's house,
but not for my son's sake. At his age, he has not, or has no longer, any
need of my advice."

"What do you mean?"

"You ought to know the reason for which I hold the world, and Paris,
especially, in such horror," said the comte, with a painful and
distressing expression; "and you may therefore believe that nothing but
circumstances of the utmost importance could have induced me to leave
Angers and have come hither--to this house. But I have been forced to
overcome my repugnance, and have recourse to everybody who could aid or
help me in a search which is most interesting to me."

"Oh, then," said Madame de Lucenay, with affectionate eagerness, "I beg
you will make use of me; dispose of me in any way in which I can be
useful to you. Do you want any interest? Because De Lucenay must have
some degree of influence; for, the days when I go to dine with my
great-aunt, De Montbrison, he entertains the deputies; and men don't do
that without some motives; and the trouble ought to be recompensed by
some contingent advantages, such as a certain amount of influence over
persons, who, in their turn, have a great deal of interest. So, I
repeat, if we can assist you, rely on us. Then there is my cousin, the
young Duke de Montbrison, who, being a peer himself, is connected with
all the young peers. If he can do anything, why, I am sure you have but
to command him. In a word, dispose of me and mine. You know whether or
not I deserve the title of a warm and devoted friend!"

"I know it well, and do not refuse your aid, although--"

"Come, my dear Alcestis, we know how the world wags, and let us act as
if we did. Whether we are here or elsewhere, it is of little
consequence, I imagine, as to the affair which interests you, and which
now interests me very much because it is yours. Let us then talk of it,
and tell me all I request of you."

So saying, the duchess approached the fireplace, leaned on the
mantelpiece, and placed on the fender one of the prettiest feet in the
world, which were, at the moment, somewhat chilled. With perfect tact
Madame de Lucenay seized the opportunity of saying no more about the
vicomte, and of engaging M. de Saint-Remy to talk of a subject to which
he attached such great importance. Clotilde's conduct would have been
very different in the presence of his mother, and to her she would have
avowed with pleasure and pride how long he had been so dear to, so
beloved by, her.

       *       *       *       *       *

In spite of his strictness and surliness, M. de Saint-Remy yielded to
the influence of the cavalier and cordial demeanour of this lady, whom
he had seen and loved when a child, and he almost forgot that he was
talking to the mistress of his son. Besides, how could he resist the
contagion of example, while the subject of a position which was
inexpressibly embarrassing did not seem disturbed, or even think she
ought to be disturbed, by the difficulty of the situation in which she
unexpectedly found herself?

"Perhaps you do not know, Clotilde," said the comte, "that I have been
living at Angers for a very long time?"

"Yes, I know it."

"In spite of the solitude I sought, I had selected that city because one
of my relations lived there,--M. de Fermont,--who, after the heavy blow
that had smitten me, behaved to me like a brother. After having
accompanied me to almost every city in Europe, where I hoped to meet
with the man I desired to slay, he served me for second in the duel--"

"Yes, that terrible duel; my father told me all concerning it!"
answered the duchess, in a sad tone of voice. "But, fortunately,
Florestan is ignorant of that duel, as well as the cause that led to
it."

"I wished to let him still respect his mother," replied the comte,
stifling a sigh. He then continued: "Some years afterwards, M. de
Fermont died at Angers in my arms, leaving a daughter and a wife, whom,
in spite of my misanthropy, I was obliged to love, because nothing in
the world could be more pure, more noble, than these two excellent
creatures. I lived alone in a remote quarter of the city; but when my
fits of black melancholy gave me some respite, I went to Madame de
Fermont to talk with her and her daughter of him we had both lost. As
whilst he was alive, so still I came to soothe and calm myself in that
gentle friendship in whose bosom I had henceforth concentrated all my
affections. The brother of Madame de Fermont dwelt in Paris, and managed
all his sister's affairs after her husband's decease. He had placed
about a hundred thousand crowns (12,000_l._), which was all the widow's
fortune, with a notary.

"After some time another and fearful shock affected Madame de Fermont.
Her brother, M. de Renneville, killed himself about eight months ago. I
did all in my power to comfort her. Her first sorrow somewhat abated, she
went to Paris to arrange her affairs. After some time I learned that, by
her orders, they were selling off the furniture she had in her small abode
at Angers, and that the money was applied to the payment of a few little
debts she had left there. This disturbed me, and, on inquiry, I learned
that this unhappy lady and her daughter were in dire distress,--the
victims, no doubt, of a bankruptcy. If Madame de Fermont could, in such
straits, rely on any one, it was on me, and yet I never received any
information or application from her. It was when I lost this acquaintance
that was so delightful to me that I felt all its value. You cannot imagine
my suffering and my uneasiness after the departure of Madame de Fermont
and her daughter. Their father--husband--had been a brother to me, and I
was resolved, therefore, to find them again, to learn how it was they had
not addressed me in their ruin, poor as I was; and therefore I set out,
leaving at Angers a person who, if anything was learned, would inform me
instantly of the news."

"Well?"

"Yesterday a letter from Angers reached me,--they know nothing. When I
reached Paris I began my researches. I went first to the old servant of
Madame de Fermont's brother; then they told me she lived on the Quai of
the Canal St. Martin."

"Well, that address--"

"Had been theirs; but they had moved, and where to was not known.
Unfortunately, up to the present time, my researches have been useless.
After a thousand vain attempts before I utterly despaired, I resolved to
come here. Perhaps Madame de Fermont, who, from some inexplicable
motive, has not asked from me aid or assistance, may have had recourse
to my son as to the son of her husband's best friend. No doubt this hope
has but very slight foundation; but I will not neglect any chance that
may enable me to discover the poor woman and her child."

The Duchess de Lucenay, who had been listening to the comte with the
utmost attention, said, suddenly:

"Really it would be very singular if these should be the same persons in
whom Madame d'Harville takes so much interest."

"What persons?" inquired the comte.

"The widow of whom you speak is still young, is she not?--her face very
striking?"

"Yes, but how do you know?"

"Her daughter, as lovely as an angel, and about sixteen at most?"

"Yes, yes."

"And her name is Claire?"

"Oh, for mercy's sake, say, where are they?"

"Alas! I know not."

"You know not?"

"I will tell you all I know. A lady of my acquaintance, Madame
d'Harville, came to me to inquire whether or not I knew a widow lady
whose daughter was named Claire, and whose brother had committed
suicide. Madame d'Harville inquired of me because she had seen these
words, 'Write to Madame de Lucenay,' written at the bottom of a rough
sketch of a letter which this unfortunate lady was writing to some
stranger of whom she was asking assistance."

"She wished to write to you; and wherefore to you?"

"I cannot solve your question."

"But she knew you, it would seem," said M. de Saint-Remy, struck with a
sudden idea.

"What mean you?"

"She had heard me speak of your father a hundred times, as well as of
you and your generous and excellent heart. In her misfortune, it
occurred to her to address you."

"That really does explain this."

"And Madame d'Harville--tell me, how did she get this sketch of a letter
into her possession?"

"That I do not know; all I can say is, that, without knowing whither
this poor mother and child had gone for refuge, she was, I believe, on
the trace of them."

"Then I rely on you, Clotilde, to introduce me to Madame d'Harville. I
must see her this very day."

"Impossible! Her husband has just been the victim of a most afflicting
accident: a pistol which he did not know to be loaded went off in his
hands, and he was killed on the spot."

"How horrible!"

"The marquise went instantly to pass the first months of her mourning
with her father in Normandy."

"Clotilde, I beseech you, write to her to-day; ask her for all the
information in her power, and, as she takes an interest in these poor
women, say she cannot find a warmer auxiliary than myself; that my only
desire is to find the widow of my friend, and share with her and her
daughter the little I possess. They are now all my family."

"Ever the same, always generous and devoted! Rely on me. I will write
to-day to Madame d'Harville. Where shall I address my answer?"

"To Asnières _Poste-Restante_."

"How odd! Why do you live there, and not in Paris?"

"I detest Paris, because of the recollections it excites in me!" said M.
de Saint-Remy, with a gloomy air. "My old physician, Doctor Griffon,
with whom I have kept up a correspondence, has a small house on the
banks of the Seine, near Asnières, which he does not occupy in the
winter; he offered it to me; it is almost close to Paris, and there I
could be undisturbed, and find the solitude I desire. So I accepted it."

"I will then write to you at Asnières, and I can give you some
information which may be useful to you, and which I had from Madame
d'Harville. Madame de Fermont's ruin has been occasioned by the roguery
of the notary in whose hands all your deceased relative's fortune was
deposited. The notary denied that the money was ever placed in his
hands."

"The scoundrel! And his name?"

"M. Jacques Ferrand," replied the duchess, without being able to conceal
her inclination to laugh.

"How strange you are, Clotilde!" said the comte, surprised and annoyed;
"nothing can be more serious, more sad than this, and yet you laugh."

In fact, Madame de Lucenay, at the recollection of the amorous
declaration of the notary, had been unable to repress her hilarity.

"Pardon me, my dear sir," she replied, "but this notary is such a
singular being, and they tell such odd stories about him; but, in truth,
if his reputation as an honest man is not more deserved than his
reputation as a religious man (and I declare that is hypocrisy) he is a
great wretch."

"And he lives--"

"Rue du Sentier."

"I will call upon him. What you tell me confirms certain other
suspicions."

"What suspicions?"

"From certain information as to the death of the brother of my poor
friend, I should be almost tempted to believe that that unhappy man,
instead of committing suicide, had been the victim of assassination."

"And what can make you suppose that?"

"Several reasons, which would be too long to detail to you now. I will
leave you. Do not forget the promises of service which you have made me
in your own and your husband's name."

"What, will you go without seeing Florestan?"

"You may suppose how painful this interview would be to me. I would
brave it only in the hope of finding some information as to Madame de
Fermont, being unwilling to neglect anything to discover her. Now, then,
adieu!"

"Ah, you are pitiless!"

"Do you not know?"

"I know that your son was never in greater need of your advice."

"What, is he not rich--happy?"

"Yes, but he is ignorant of mankind. Blindly extravagant, because he is
generous and confiding in everything, and everywhere and always free and
noble, I fear people take advantage of his liberality. If you but knew
the nobleness of his heart! I have never dared to preach to him on the
subject of his expenditure and want of care: in the first place, because
I am as inconsiderate as himself, and next, in the second place, for
other reasons; whilst you, on the contrary--"

Madame de Lucenay could not finish. The voice of Florestan de Saint-Remy
was heard. He entered hastily into the cabinet next to the room in which
they were, and, after having shut the door suddenly, he said, in a
broken voice, to some one who accompanied him:

"But it is impossible."

"I tell you again," replied the clear and sharp voice of M. Badinot, "I
tell you again that, if not, why, in four hours you will be apprehended;
for, if he has not the cash forthwith, our man will lodge his complaint
with the king's attorney-general; and you know the result of a forgery
like this,--the galleys, the galleys, my poor dear vicomte!"




CHAPTER XI.

THE INTERVIEW.


It is impossible to paint the look which Madame de Lucenay and the
father of Florestan exchanged at these terrible words,--"The galleys,
the galleys, my poor dear vicomte!" The comte became deadly pale, and
leant on the back of an armchair, whilst his knees seemed to sink
beneath him. His venerable and respected name,--his name dishonoured by
the man whom he accused of being the fruit of adultery!

The first feeling over, the contracted features of the old man, a
threatening gesture which he made as he advanced towards the adjoining
apartment, betrayed a resolution so alarming that Madame de Lucenay
seized his hand, and said, in an accent of the most perfect conviction:

"He is innocent; I will swear it. Listen in silence."

The comte paused. He wished to believe what the duchess said to him, and
she was entirely persuaded of Florestan's untarnished honour. To obtain
fresh sacrifices from this woman, so blindly generous,--sacrifices which
alone could save him from arrest,--and the prosecution of Jacques
Ferrand, the vicomte had affirmed to Madame de Lucenay that, duped by a
scoundrel from whom he had taken a forged bill in exchange, he ran the
risk of being considered as the forger's accomplice, as having himself
put this bill into circulation. Madame de Lucenay knew that the vicomte
was imprudent, extravagant, reckless; but she never for an instant
supposed him capable, not only of a base or an infamous action, but
even of the slightest indiscretion. Twice lending him considerable sums
under very trying circumstances, she had wished to render him a friendly
service, the vicomte expressly accepting these loans under the condition
that he should return them; for there were persons, he said, who owed
him double that amount; and his style of living made it seem probable.

Besides, Madame de Lucenay, yielding to the impulse of her natural
kindness, had only thought of how she could be useful to Florestan,
without ever reflecting as to whether or not he would ever return the
sums thus advanced. He said so, and she did not doubt him; for,
otherwise, would he have accepted such large amounts? When, then, she
thus answered for Florestan's honour, entreating the old comte to listen
to his son's conversation, the duchess thought that it was a question of
the breach of honour of which the vicomte had declared himself the
victim, and that he must stand forth completely exonerated in the eyes
of his father.

"Again I declare," continued Florestan, in a troubled voice, "this
Petit-Jean is a scamp; he assured me that he had no other bills in his
hands but those which I received from him yesterday and three days
previously. I believed this one was still in circulation, and only due
three months hence, in London, at the house of Adams and Company."

"Yes, yes," said the sarcastic voice of Badinot, "I know, my dear
vicomte, that you had managed the affair very cleverly, so that your
forgeries would not be detected until you were a long way off; but you
tried to 'do' those who were more cunning than yourself."

"And you dare to say that to me, now, rogue as you are," exclaimed
Florestan, furious with anger, "when was it not you yourself who brought
me into contact with the person who negotiated these bills?"

"Now, my dear aristocrat," replied Badinot, coolly, "be cool! You very
skilfully counterfeit commercial signatures; but, although they are so
adroitly done, that is no reason why you should treat your friends with
disagreeable familiarity; and, if you give way to unseemly fits of
temper, I shall leave you, and then you may arrange this matter by
yourself."

"And do you think it possible for a man to be calm in such a position as
that in which I find myself? If what you say be true, if this charge be
to-day preferred at the office of the attorney-general, I am lost!"

"It is really as I tell you, unless you have again recourse to your
charming, blue-eyed Providence."

"Impossible!"

"Then make up your mind to the worst. It is a pity; it was the last
bill; and for five and twenty thousand miserable francs (1,000_l._) to
go and take the air at Toulon is awkward, absurd, foolish! How could a
clever fellow like you allow yourself to be thus taken aback?"

"What can I do? What can I do? Nothing here is my own, and I have not
twenty louis in the world left."

"Your friends?"

"Why, I am in debt to every one who could lend me. Do you think else
that I am such a fool as to have waited until to-day before I applied to
them?"

"True; but, come, let us discuss the matter quietly; that is the best
way of arriving at a reasonable conclusion. Just now, I wish to explain
to you how you had been met by a party more clever than yourself, but
you did not attend to me."

"Well, tell me now, if that will do any good."

"Let us recapitulate. You said to me two months since, 'I have bills on
different banking-houses, at long dates, for a hundred and thirteen
thousand francs (4,520_l._), and, my dear Badinot, I wish you to find me
the means of cashing them.'"

"Well, and then--"

"Listen: I asked you to let me see these bills; a certain something made
me suspect that they were forged, although so admirably done. I did not
suspect, it is true, that you were so expert in calligraphy; but,
employing myself in looking after your fortune when you had no longer
any fortune to look after, I found you were completely done up! I had
arranged the deed by which your horses, your carriages, and the
furniture of this house became the property of Boyer and Edwards. Thus,
then, there was no wonder at my astonishment when I found you in
possession of commercial securities to such a considerable amount, eh?"

"Never mind your astonishment, but come to the point."

"I am close upon it. I have enough experience or timidity not to be very
anxious to mix myself up with affairs of this nature; I therefore
advised you to consult a third party, who, no less clear-sighted than
myself, suspected the trick you desired to play him."

"Impossible! He would not have discounted the bills if he had believed
them forged."

"How much money down did you get for these hundred and thirteen thousand
francs?"

"Twenty-five thousand francs in ready money, and the rest in small debts
to collect."

"And how much of these small debts did you collect?"

"Nothing, as you very well know; they were fictitious; but still he
risked twenty-five thousand francs."

"How green you are, my dear vicomte! Having my commission of a hundred
louis to receive of you if the affair came off, I took very good care
not to say a word to No. 3 as to the real state of your affairs. Thus he
believed you entirely at your ease, and he, moreover, knew how you were
adored by a certain great lady, immensely rich, who would not allow you
to be left in any difficulties, and thus he was quite sure of
recovering at least as much as he advanced. He ran a risk, certainly, of
losing something, but he also ran a chance of gaining very considerably;
and his calculation was correct, for, the other day, you counted out to
him a hundred thousand francs, good and sound, in order to retire the
bill for fifty-eight thousand francs; and, yesterday, thirty thousand
francs for the second; for that he contented himself, it is true, with
the actual amount. How you raised these thirty thousand francs
yesterday, devil fetch me, if I can guess! But you are a wonderful
fellow! You see, now, that, to wind up the account, if Petit-Jean forces
you to pay the last bill of twenty-five thousand francs, he will have
received from you a hundred and fifty-five thousand francs for the
twenty-five thousand which he originally handed to you. So I was quite
right when I said that you had met with a person even more clever than
yourself."

"But why did he say that this last bill which he presents to-day was
negotiated?"

"That you might not take the alarm, he told you also that, except that
of fifty-eight thousand francs, the others were in circulation; the
first being paid, yesterday comes the second, and to-day the third."

"Scoundrel!"

"Listen: every one for himself; but let us talk coolly. This must prove
to you that Petit-Jean (and, between ourselves, I should not be
astonished to find out that, in spite of his sanctity, Jacques Ferrand
went snacks in the speculation), this must prove, I say, that
Petit-Jean, led on by your first payments, speculates on this last bill,
as he has speculated on the others, quite certain that your friends will
not allow you to be handed over to a court of assizes. It is for you to
see whether or not these friendships are yet drained dry, or if there
are yet a few more drops to be squeezed out; for if, in three hours, the
twenty-five thousand francs are not forthcoming, noble vicomte, you
will be in the 'Stone Jug.'"

"Which you keep saying to me--"

"In order that you may thoroughly comprehend me, and agree, perhaps, to
try and draw another feather from the wing of this generous duchess."

"I repeat, it is useless to think of such a thing. Any hope of finding
twenty-five thousand francs in three hours, after the sacrifices she has
already made, would be madness to expect."

"To please you, happy mortal, impossibilities would be attempted!"

"Oh, she has already tried impossibilities; for it was one to borrow a
hundred thousand francs from her husband, and to succeed; but such
phenomena are not expected twice in a lifetime. Now, my dear Badinot, up
to this time you have had no cause to complain of me. I have always been
generous. Try and obtain some delay from this wretch, Petit-Jean. You
know very well I always find a way of recompensing those who serve me;
and when once this last affair is got over I will try again, and you
shall be satisfied."

"Petit-Jean is as inflexible as you are unreasonable."

"I!"

"Try once more to interest your generous friend in your sad fate. Devil
take it! Why not tell her plump all about it; not, as you have already,
that you have been the dupe of forgers, but that you are a forger
yourself?"

"I will never make to her any such confession; it would be to shame
myself for no advantage."

"Do you prefer, then, that she should learn the fact to-morrow by the
_Gazette des Tribunaux_."

"I have three hours before me, and can fly."

"Where can you go without money? But look at the other side of the
matter. This last forged bill retired, you will be again in a splendid
position; you will only have a few debts. Come, promise me that you
will again speak to your duchess. You are such a fellow for the women!
You know how to make yourself interesting in spite of your errors; and,
let the worst come to the worst, they will like you a little the worse,
or not at all; but they will extricate you from your mess. Come, come,
see your lovely and loving friend once more. I will run to Petit-Jean,
and I feel sure I shall get a respite of an hour or two."

"Hell! Must I, then, drink the draught of shame to the very dregs?"

"Come, come, good luck; be tender, passionate, charming. I will run to
Petit-Jean; you will find me there until three o'clock; later than that
will be useless; the attorney-general's office closes at four o'clock."
And M. Badinot left the apartment.

When the door was closed, they heard Florestan exclaim in accents of the
deepest despair: "_Mon Dieu! Mon Dieu! Mon Dieu!_"

During this conversation, which unveiled to the comte the infamy of his
son, and to Madame de Lucenay the infamy of the man she had so blindly
loved, both had remained motionless, scarcely breathing, beneath this
fearful disclosure. It would be impossible to depict the mute eloquence
of the agonising scene which took place between this young lady and the
comte when he had no longer any possible doubt as to Florestan's crime.
Extending his arms to the room in which his son was, the old man smiled
with bitterest sarcasm, casting an overwhelming look on Madame de
Lucenay, which seemed to say, "And this is the man for whom you have
braved all shame,--made every sacrifice! This is he whom you have
reproached me for abandoning?"

The duchess understood the reproach, and, bowing her head, she felt all
the weight of her shame. The lesson was terrible. By degrees, however, a
haughty indignation succeeded to the cruel anxiety which had contracted
the features of Madame de Lucenay. The inexcusable faults of this lady
were at least palliated by the sincerity and disinterestedness of her
love, by the boldness of her devotion and the boundlessness of her
generosity, by the frankness of her character, and by her inexorable
aversion from all that was contemptible and base.

Still too young, too handsome, too _recherché_, to feel the humiliation
of having been merely made a tool of, when once the feeling of love was
suddenly crushed within her, this haughty and decided woman felt no
longer hatred or anger, but instantaneously, and without any transition,
a deadly disgust, an icy disdain, at once destroyed all that affection
hitherto so strong. She was no longer the mistress, unworthily deceived
by her lover, but the lady of high blood and rank detecting a man of her
circle to be a swindler and a forger, and driving him forth. Supposing
that there were even some extenuating circumstances for the ignominy of
Florestan, Madame de Lucenay would not have admitted them; for, in her
estimation, the man who crossed certain bounds of honour, whether from
vice, weakness, or persuasion, no longer had an existence in her eyes,
honourable demeanour being with her a question of existence or
non-existence. The only painful feeling which the duchess experienced
was excited by the terrible effect which this unexpected revelation
produced on her old friend, the comte.

For some moments he seemed neither to see nor hear; his eyes were fixed,
his head bowed, his arms hanging by his side, his face livid as death;
whilst from time to time a convulsive sigh heaved his breast. With such
a man, as resolute as energetic, such a condition was more alarming than
the most violent transports of anger. Madame de Lucenay regarded him
with great uneasiness.

"Courage, my dear friend," she said to him, in a low voice, "for
you,--for me,--for this man,--I know what remains for me to do."

The old man looked steadfastly at her, and then, as if aroused from his
stupor by a violent internal commotion, he raised his head, his features
assumed a menacing appearance, and, forgetting that his son could hear
him, he exclaimed:

"And I, too, for you,--for me,--and for this man,--I know what remains
for me to do."

"Who is there?" inquired Florestan, surprised.

Madame de Lucenay, fearing to find herself in the vicomte's presence,
disappeared by the little door, and descended the secret staircase.
Florestan having again asked who was there, and receiving no reply,
entered the salon. He found the comte there alone. The old man's long
beard had so greatly altered him, and he was so miserably clad, that his
son, who had not seen him for several years, not recognising him at the
moment, advanced towards him with a menacing air.

"What are you doing there? Who are you?"

"The husband of that woman!" replied the comte, pointing to the picture
of Madame de Saint-Remy.

"My father!" exclaimed Florestan, recoiling in alarm, as he recalled the
features of the comte, so long forgotten.

Standing erect, with threatening air, angry look, his forehead scarlet,
the comte looked down upon his son, who, with his head bent down, dared
not raise his eyes towards him. Still, M. de Saint-Remy, for some
motive, made a violent effort to remain calm, and conceal his real
feelings and resentment.

"My father!" said Florestan, half choked. "You were there?"

"I was there."

"You heard, then?"

"All!"

"Ah!" cried the vicomte, in agony, and hiding his face in his hands.

There was a minute's silence. Florestan, at first as much astonished as
annoyed at the unexpected appearance of his father, began to reflect
upon what advantage he could derive from this incident.

"All is not lost," he said to himself; "my father's presence is a stroke
of fate. He knows all; he will not have his name dishonoured. He is not
rich, but he must possess more than twenty-five thousand francs. A
little skill, and I may leave my duchess at peace, and be saved!" Then,
giving to his handsome features an expression of grief and dejection,
moistening his eye with the tears of repentance, assuming his most
touching tone of voice, he exclaimed, clasping his hands with a gesture
of despair:

"Ah, father, I am indeed wretched! After so many years,--to see you--at
such a moment! I must appear to you most culpable; but deign to listen
to me! I beseech you, allow me, not to justify myself, but to explain to
you my conduct! Will you, my father?"

M. de Saint-Remy made no reply; his features remained rigid; but,
seating himself, his chin leaning on the palm of his hand, he
contemplated the vicomte in silence. Had Florestan known the motives
which filled the mind of his father with fury and vengeance, alarmed by
the apparent composure of the comte, he would not, doubtless, have tried
to dupe him. But, ignorant of the suspicions respecting the legitimacy
of his birth, and of his mother's lapse of virtue, he had no doubt of
the success of his deceit, thinking his father, who was very proud of
his name, was capable of making any sacrifice rather than allow it to be
dishonoured.

"My father," resumed Florestan, timidly, "allow me to endeavour, not to
exculpate myself, but to tell you by what a series of involuntary
temptations I have done, in spite of myself,--such--an infamous action."

The vicomte took his father's silence for tacit consent, and continued:

"When I had the misfortune to lose my mother--my poor mother!--I was
alone, without advice or support. Master of a considerable fortune, used
to luxury from my cradle, it became to me a necessity. Ignorant how
difficult it is to earn money, I was immeasurably prodigal.
Unfortunately, my expenses, foolish as they were, were remarkable for
their elegance. By my taste, I eclipsed men ten times richer than
myself. This first success intoxicated me, and I became a man of
extravagance, as one becomes a man of arms, or a statesman. Yes, I liked
luxury, not from vulgar ostentation, but I liked it as a painter loves
his art. Like every artist, I was jealous of my work, and my work was to
me luxury. I sacrificed everything to its perfection. I wished to have
it beautiful and complete in everything, from my stable to my
drawing-room, from my coat to my house. I wished my life to be the
emblem of taste and elegance. In fact, as an artist, I sought the
applause of the mob and the admiration of the élite. This success is
rare, but I acquired it."

As he spake, Florestan's features gradually lost their hypocritical
assumption, and his eyes kindled with enthusiasm. He looked in his
father's face, and, thinking it was somewhat softened, continued:

"Oracle and regulator of the world, my praise or blame were law: I was
quoted, copied, boasted of, admired, and that by the best circle in
Paris, which is to say in Europe--in the world. The women participated
in the general enthusiasm, and the loveliest contended for the pleasure
of being invited to certain fêtes which I gave, and everywhere wonder
was expressed at the incomparable elegance and taste displayed at these
fêtes, which millionaires could not equal. In fine, I was the monarch of
fashion. This word will tell you all, my father, if you comprehend it."

"I do comprehend it, and I am sure that at the galleys you will invent
some refined elegance in your fashion of wearing your chain that will
become the mode in your gang, and will be called _à la_ Saint-Remy,"
said the old man, with cutting irony, adding, "and Saint-Remy,--that is
my name!" And again he was silent.

Florestan had need of all his self-control to conceal the wound which
this bitter sarcasm inflicted. He continued in a more humble tone:

"Alas! Father, it is not from pride that I revive the recollection of my
success, for, I repeat to you, it is that success which has undone me.
Sought, envied, and flattered, not by interested parasites, but by
persons much superior in position to myself, I no longer calculated my
fortune must be expended in a few years; that I did not heed. Could I
renounce this favourite, dazzling life, in which pleasures succeeded
pleasures, every kind of intoxication to every kind of enchantment? Ah,
if you knew, father, what it is to be hailed as the hero of the day, to
hear the murmur which greets your entrance into the salon, to hear the
women say, 'That is he! There he is!'--oh, if you knew--"

"I know," said the old man, without moving from his attitude,--"I know.
Yes, the other day, in a public place, there was a crowd; suddenly a
murmur was heard, like that which greets you when you enter some place;
then the women's eyes were all turned eagerly on a very handsome young
man, just as they are turned towards you, and they pointed him out to
one another, saying, 'That's he! There he is!' just as if they were
directing attention to you."

"And this man, my father?"

"Was a forger they were conveying to gaol."

"Ah!" exclaimed Florestan, with concentrated rage. Then affecting the
deepest affliction, he added, "My father, you are pitiless,--what shall
I then say to you? I do not seek to deny my errors, I only desire to
explain to you the fatal infatuation which has caused them. Well, then,
even if you should overwhelm me still with your bitterest sarcasms, I
will endeavour to go through with this confession,--I will endeavour to
make you comprehend this feverish excitement which has destroyed me,
because then, perchance, you may pity me,--yes, for there is pity for a
madman, and I was mad! Shutting my eyes, I abandoned myself to the
dazzling whirl into which I was drawn, and drew with me the most
charming women, the most delightful men. How could I check myself? As
easily say to the poet who exhausts himself, and whose genius preys upon
his health, 'Pause in the midst of the inspiration which urges you!' No!
He could not--I could not, abdicate the royalty which I exercised, and
return shamed, ruined, and mocked at, into the unknown mob, giving this
triumph to those who envied me, and whom, until then, I had defied,
controlled, overpowered! No! No! I could not, voluntarily, at least.

"Then came the fatal day, when, for the first time, money failed me. I
was surprised as much as if such a moment never could have arrived. Yet
I had still my horses, my carriages, the furniture of this house. When
my debts were paid there would, perhaps, still remain to me about sixty
thousand francs. What could I do in such misery? It was then, father,
that I made my first step in the path of disgrace; until this time I was
honourable,--I had only spent what belonged to me, but then I began to
incur debts which I had no chance of paying. I sold all I had to two of
my domestics in order to pay my debt to them, and to be enabled to
continue for six months longer, in spite of my creditors, to enjoy the
luxury which intoxicated me.

"To supply my play debts and extravagant outlay I first borrowed of the
Jews, then, to pay the Jews, of my friends, then, to pay my friends, of
my mistresses. These resources exhausted, there was another period of my
life; from an honest man I became a gambler, but, as yet, I was not
criminal--I still hesitated--I desired to take a violent resolution. I
had proved in several duels that I did not fear death. I determined to
kill myself!"

"Ah! Bah! Really?" said the comte, with fierce irony.

"You do not believe me, father?"

"It was too soon or too late!" replied the old man, still unmoved, and
in the same attitude.

Florestan, believing that he had moved his father by speaking to him of
his project for committing suicide, thought it necessary to increase the
effect by a _coup de théâtre_. He opened a drawer, took from it a small
bottle of greenish glass, and said to the comte, depositing it on the
table:

"An Italian quack sold me this poison."

"And was this poison for yourself?" said the old man, still having his
chin in the palm of his hand.

Florestan understood the force of the remark, his features expressed
real indignation; for this time he spoke the truth. One day he took it
into his head to kill himself,--an ephemeral fancy! Persons of his stamp
are usually too cowardly to make up their minds calmly, and without
witnesses, to the death which they face as a point of honour in a duel.
He therefore exclaimed, with an accent of truth:

"I have fallen very low, but not so low as that. It was for myself that
I reserved this poison."

"And then were afraid of it?" asked the comte, without changing his
posture.

"I confess I recoiled before this trying extremity,--nothing was yet
desperate. The persons to whom I owed money were rich and could wait. At
my age, and with my connections, I hoped for a moment, if not to repair
my fortunes, at least to acquire for myself an honourable position, an
independence which would have supplied my present situation. Many of my
friends, perhaps less qualified than myself, had made rapid progress in
diplomacy. I had ambition. I had but to make it known, and I was
attached to the legation to Gerolstein. Unfortunately, a few days after
this nomination, a gaming debt, contracted with a man who detested me,
placed me in a cruel dilemma. I had exhausted my last resources. A fatal
idea flashed across my mind. Believing that I was assured of impunity, I
committed an infamous action. You see, my father, I conceal nothing from
you. I avow the ignominy of my conduct,--I do not seek to extenuate
anything. Two alternatives are now before me, and I am equally inclined
to either. The one is to kill myself, and leave your name dishonoured;
for if I do not pay this very day the twenty-five thousand francs, the
accusation is made, and all is made public, and, dead or alive, I am
disgraced. The second is to throw myself into your arms, father, to say
to you, 'Save your son,--save your name from infamy;' and I swear to you
to depart for Africa to-morrow, and die a soldier's death, or return to
you completely restored in reputation. What I say to you, father, is
true,--in face of the extremity which overwhelms me, I have no other
resource. Decide: shall I die covered with shame, or, thanks to you,
live to repair my fault? These are not the threats of a young man. I am
twenty-five; I bear your name, and I have sufficient courage either to
kill myself, or to become a soldier; for I will not go to the galleys."

[Illustration: _Was about to embrace his father._
Etching by Marcel after the drawing by Frank T. Merrill.]

The comte rose from his seat, saying:

"I do not desire to have my name dishonoured."

"Oh, my father!" exclaimed the vicomte, with warmth, and was about to
embrace his father, when the old man, repressing his enthusiasm, said:

"You are expected until three o'clock at the man's house who has the
forged bill?"

"Yes, father, and it is now two o'clock."

"Let us go into your cabinet; give me writing materials."

"They are here, father."

The comte sat down and wrote, with a firm hand:

      "I undertake to pay this evening, at ten o'clock, the
    twenty-five thousand francs which my son owes.

                                        "COMTE DE SAINT-REMY."

"Your creditor merely wants his money; my guarantee will obtain a
further delay. Let him go to M. Dupont, the banker, at No. 7 in the Rue
Richelieu, and he will assure him of the validity of this promise."

"Oh, my father! How can I ever--"

"Expect me this evening; at ten o'clock I will bring the money. Let your
creditor be here."

"Yes, father, and the day after I will set out for Africa. You shall see
that I am not ungrateful! Then, perhaps, when I am again restored to
honour you will accept my thanks?"

"You owe me nothing. I have said that my name shall not be dishonoured
again; nor shall it be," said M. de Saint-Remy, in reply, taking up his
cane, and moving towards the door.

"My father, at least shake hands with me!" said Florestan.

"Here this evening at ten o'clock," said the comte, refusing his hand.

"Saved!" exclaimed Florestan, joyously,--"saved!" Then he continued,
after a moment's reflection: "Saved--almost--no matter--it is always so.
Perhaps this evening I shall tell him of the other thing. He is in the
vein, and will not allow a first sacrifice to become useless for lack of
a second. Yet why should I tell him? Who will ever know it? Yet, if
nothing should be discovered, I shall keep the money he will give me to
pay this last debt. I had some work to move him. The bitterness of his
sarcasms made me suspicious of his good resolution; but my threat of
suicide, the fear of seeing his name dishonoured, decided him. That was
the way to hit him. No doubt he is not so poor as he appears to be. But
his arrival was indeed a godsend. Now, then, for the man of law!"

He rang the bell, and M. Boyer appeared.

"How was it that you did not inform me that my father was here? Really,
this is most negligent."

"Twice I endeavoured to address your lordship when you came in by the
garden gate with M. Badinot, but your lordship made me a sign with your
hand not to interrupt you. I did not venture to insist. I should be very
much grieved if your lordship should impute negligence to me."

"Very well. Desire Edwards to harness Orion or Ploughboy in the
cabriolet immediately."

M. Boyer made a respectful bow. As he was about to quit the room, some
one knocked. He looked at the vicomte with an inquiring air.

"Come in!" said Florestan.

A second _valet de chambre_ appeared, bearing in his hand a small
silver-gilt waiter. M. Boyer took hold of the waiter with a kind of
jealous haste, and presented it to the vicomte, who took from it a thick
packet, sealed with black wax.

The two servants withdrew discreetly.

Florestan broke open the envelope. It contained twenty-five thousand
francs in treasury bills, but not a word of writing.

"Decidedly," he exclaimed, in a joyful tone, "the day is propitious!
Saved this time, and at this moment completely saved! I will run to the
jeweller; and yet," he added, "perhaps--no--let us wait--he cannot have
any suspicion of me. Twenty-five thousand francs is a pleasant sum to
have by one! _Pardieu!_ I was a fool ever to doubt the luck of my star;
at the moment when it seemed most obscure, has it not burst forth more
brilliant than ever? But where does this money come from? The writing of
the address is unknown to me. Let me examine the seal,--the cipher. Yes,
yes, I cannot mistake; an N and an L,--it is Clotilde! How could she
know? And not a word,--that's strange! How very opportune, though! Ah,
_mon Dieu!_ now I remember. I had an appointment with her this morning.
That Badinot's threats drove it out of my head. I forgot Clotilde. After
having waited for me down-stairs, no doubt she went away; and this is,
unquestionably, a delicate way of making me understand that she fears I
may forget her through some pecuniary embarrassment. Yes, it is an
indirect reproach that I have not applied to her as usual. Good
Clotilde! Always the same,--generous as a queen! What a pity I was ever
driven to ask her,--her still so handsome! I sometimes regret it, but I
only did it in a direful extremity, and on sheer compulsion."

"Your lordship's cabriolet is at the door," said M. Boyer, on entering
the room.

"Who brought this letter?" Florestan inquired.

"I do not know, my lord."

"Well, I will ask below. But tell me, was there no one in the ground
floor?" asked the vicomte, looking significantly at Boyer.

"There is no one there now, my lord."

"I was not mistaken," thought Florestan; "Clotilde waited for me, and is
now gone."

"If your lordship would have the goodness to grant me two minutes," said
Boyer.

"Speak, but be quick!"

"Edwards and myself have learnt that the Duc de Montbrison is desirous
of forming an establishment. If your lordship would but just be so kind
to propose your own ready furnished, with the stable in first-rate
order, it would be a most admirable opportunity for Edwards and myself
to get the whole off our hands, and, perhaps, for your lordship a good
reason for disposing of them."

"_Pardieu!_ Boyer, you are right. As for me, I should prefer such an
arrangement. I will see Montbrison, and speak to him. What are your
terms?"

"Your lordship will easily understand that we are desirous of profiting
as much as possible by your generosity."

"And turn your bargain to the best advantage? Nothing can be plainer!
Let us see,--what's the price?"

"The whole, two hundred and sixty thousand francs (10,400_l._), my
lord."

"And you and Edwards will thus clear--"

"About forty thousand francs (1,600_l._), my lord."

"A very nice sum! But so much the better, for, after all, I am very much
satisfied with you, and, if I had to make my will, I should have
bequeathed that sum to you and Edwards."

And the vicomte went out, first to call on his creditor, then on Madame
de Lucenay, whom he did not suspect of having been present at his
conversation with Badinot.




CHAPTER XII.

THE SEARCH.


The Hôtel de Lucenay was one of those royal residences of the Faubourg
St. Germain, which the space employed, and, as it were, lost, make so
vast. A modern house might, with ease, be contained in the limits
devoted to the staircase of one of these palaces, and a whole quarter
might be built in the extent they occupy.

About nine o'clock in the evening of this day the two vast folding-doors
of this hôtel opened on the arrival of a magnificent chariot, which,
after having taken a dashing turn in the spacious courtyard, stopped
before the large covered flight of steps which led to the first
antechamber. Whilst the hoofs of two powerful and high-couraged horses
sounded on the echoing pavement, a gigantic footman opened the door,
emblazoned with armorial bearings, and a young man alighted gracefully
from this brilliant carriage, and no less gracefully walked up the five
or six steps of the entrance. This young man was the Vicomte de
Saint-Remy.

On leaving his creditor, who, satisfied with the undertaking of
Florestan's father, had granted the required delay, and was to come and
receive his money at ten o'clock in the Rue de Chaillot, M. de
Saint-Remy had gone to Madame de Lucenay's, to thank her for the fresh
service she had rendered him, and, not having seen the duchess during
the morning, he came triumphant, certain of finding her in _prima sera_,
the hour which she constantly reserved for him.

By the attention of the footmen in the antechamber, who hastened to open
the glass door as soon as they saw Florestan's carriage, by the
profoundly respectful air with which the rest of the livery all rose as
the vicomte passed by, and by certain, yet almost imperceptible touches,
it was evident that here was the second, or, rather, the real master of
the house.

When the Duc de Lucenay returned home, with his umbrella in his hand and
his feet protected by clumsy goloshes (he hated going out in a carriage
in the daytime), the same domestic evolutions were gone through with
similar respect; still, in the eyes of a keen observer, there was a vast
difference between the reception accorded to the husband and that
reserved for the lover.

A corresponding attention displayed itself in the footman's waiting-room
when Florestan entered it, and one of the valets instantly arose to
announce him to Madame de Lucenay.

The vicomte had never been more joyous, never felt himself more at his
ease, more confident of himself, more assured of conquest. The victory
he had obtained over his father in the morning, the fresh proof of
attachment on the part of Madame de Lucenay, the joy at having escaped,
as it were, by a miracle, from a terrible situation, his renewed
confidence in his star, gave his handsome features an expression of
boldness and good humour which rendered it still more captivating.

In fact, he had never felt himself more himself. And he was right. Never
had his slender and graceful figure displayed a finer carriage, never
had his look been more elevated, never had his pride been more
deliciously tickled by the thought, "The great lady--the mistress of
this palace is mine--is at my feet! This very morning she waited for me
in my own house!"

Florestan had given way to these excessively vain-glorious reflections
as he traversed three or four apartments, which led to a small room in
which the duchess usually sat. A last look at himself in a glass which
he passed completed the excellent opinion which Florestan had of
himself. The _valet de chambre_ opened the folding-doors of the salon,
and announced, "Monsieur the Vicomte de Saint-Remy!"

It is impossible to paint the astonishment and indignation of the
duchess. She believed the comte had not concealed from his son that she
also had overheard all.

We have already said that, on discovering Florestan's infamy, Madame de
Lucenay's love, suddenly quenched, had changed into the most frigid
disdain. We have also said that, in the midst of her errors, her
frailties, Madame de Lucenay had preserved pure and intact her feelings
of rectitude, honour, and chivalric frankness, whose strength and
requirements were excessively strong. She possessed the better qualities
of her faults, the virtues of her vices.

Treating love as cavalierly as a man treats it, she pushed as far, nay,
further, than a man, devotion, generosity, courage, and, above all,
intense horror of all baseness. Madame de Lucenay, being about to go to
a party in the evening, was, although without her diamonds, dressed with
her accustomed taste and magnificence; and her splendid costume, the
rouge she wore without attempt at concealment, like a court lady, up to
her eyelids, her beauty, which was especially brilliant at candle-light,
her figure of a goddess walking in the clouds, rendered still more
striking that noble air which no one displayed to greater advantage than
she did, and which she carried, if requisite, to a height of insolence
that was overwhelming.

We know the haughty and resolute disposition of the duchess, and we may
imagine her physiognomy, her look, when the vicomte, advancing towards
her, conceited, smiling, confident, said, in a tone of love:

"Dearest Clotilde, how good you are! How you--"

The vicomte could not finish. The duchess was seated, and had not
risen; but her gesture, her glance, betokened contempt, at once so calm
and crushing that Florestan stopped short. He could not utter another
word, nor advance another step. He had never before seen Madame de
Lucenay under this aspect. He could not believe that it was the same
woman, whom he had always found gentle, tender, and passionately
submissive; for nothing is more humble, more timid, than a determined
woman in the presence of the man whom she loves and who controls her.

His first surprise past, Florestan was ashamed of his weakness; his
habitual audacity resumed its ascendency, and, making a step towards
Madame de Lucenay in order to take her hand, he said, in his most
insinuating tone:

"Clotilde, what ails you? I never saw you look so lovely, and yet--"

"Really, this is too impudent!" exclaimed the duchess, recoiling with
such disgust and hauteur that Florestan was again overcome with
surprise.

Resuming some assurance, he said to her:

"Will you, at least, Clotilde, tell me the cause of this change, sudden,
singular as it is? What have I done? How have I offended?"

Without making any reply, Madame de Lucenay looked at him, as is
vulgarly said, from head to foot, with so insulting an expression that
Florestan felt red with the anger which displayed itself upon his brow,
and exclaimed:

"I am aware, madame, that it is thus you habitually break off. Is it a
rupture that you now desire?"

"The question is singular!" said Madame de Lucenay, with a sarcastic
laugh. "Learn, sir, that when a lackey robs me, I do not break with him,
I turn him away."

"Madame!"

"Oh, a truce to this!" said the duchess, in a stern and peremptory tone.
"Your presence disgusts me! Why are you here? Have you not had your
money?"

"It is true, then, as I guessed, the twenty-five thousand francs--"

"Your last forgery is withdrawn, is it not? The honour of your family's
name is saved,--that is well,--go!"

"Ah! believe me--"

"I very much regret that money, for it might have succoured so many
honest families; but it was necessary to think of the shame to your
father and to myself."

"So then, Clotilde, you know all? Ah, then, now nothing is left me but
to die!" exclaimed Florestan, in a most pathetic and despairing tone.

A burst of derisive laughter from the duchess hailed this tragic
exclamation, and she added, between two fits of fresh hilarity:

"I could never have believed infamy could appear so ridiculous!"

"Madame!" cried Florestan, his features contracted with rage.

The two folding-doors opened with a loud noise, and M. le Duc de
Montbrison was announced.

In spite of his self-command, Florestan could scarcely repress the
violence of his resentment, which any man more observing than the duke
must certainly have perceived.

M. de Montbrison was scarcely eighteen years of age. Let our readers
imagine a most engaging countenance, like that of a young girl, white
and red, whose vermilion lips and downy chin were slightly shaded by a
nascent beard. Let them add to this large brown eyes, as yet timid, but
which in time would gleam like a falcon's, a figure as graceful as that
of the duchess herself, and then, perhaps, they may have some idea of
this young duke, the Cherubino as complete in idea as ever countess or
waiting-maid decked in a woman's cap, after having remarked the ivory
whiteness of his neck.

The vicomte had the weakness or the audacity to remain.

"How kind of you, Conrad, to think of me this evening!" said Madame de
Lucenay, in a most affectionate voice, and extending her hand to the
young duke, who was about to shake hands with his cousin, but Clotilde
raised her hand a little, and said to him gaily:

"Kiss it, cousin,--you have your gloves on."

"Pardon me, my dear cousin," said the young man, as he applied his lips
to the naked and charming hand that was offered to him.

"What are you going to do this evening, Conrad?" inquired Madame de
Lucenay, without seeming to take the slightest notice in the world of
Florestan.

"Nothing, cousin; when I leave you, I shall go to the club."

"Indeed you shall not; you shall accompany us, M. de Lucenay and me, to
Madame de Senneval's; she gives a party, and has frequently asked me to
introduce you to her."

"I shall be but too happy."

"Then, too, I must tell you frankly that I don't like to see you begin
so early with your habits and tastes for clubs. You are possessed of
everything necessary in order to be everywhere welcomed, and even sought
after, in the world, and you ought, therefore, to mix with it as much as
possible."

"Yes, you are right, cousin."

"And as I am on the footing of a grandmother with you, my dear Conrad, I
am determined to exact a great deal from you. You are emancipated, it is
true, but I believe you will want a guardian for a long time to come,
and you must, therefore, consider me in that light."

"Most joyfully, happily, cousin!" said the young duke, emphatically.

It is impossible to describe the mute rage of Florestan, who was
standing up, and leaning with his elbow on the mantelpiece. Neither the
duke nor Clotilde paid the slightest attention to him. Knowing the
rapidity with which Madame de Lucenay decided, he imagined she was
pushing her boldness and contempt so far as to commence at once, and in
his presence, a regular flirtation with the Duc de Montbrison.

It was not so. The duchess felt for her cousin nothing beyond a truly
maternal affection, having almost seen him born. But the young duke was
so handsome, and seemed so happy at the agreeable reception of his
cousin, that the jealousy, or, rather, pride of Florestan was aroused.
His heart writhed beneath the cruel wounds of envy, excited by Conrad de
Montbrison, who, rich and handsome, was beginning so splendidly that
life of pleasures, enjoyments, and fêtes, from which he, ruined, undone,
despised, dishonoured, was expelled.

M. de Saint-Remy was brave with that bravery of the head, if we may so
call it, which will urge a man, by anger or by vanity, to face a duel.
But, vitiated and corrupted, he had not the courage of the heart which
triumphs over bad inclinations, or which, at least, gives the energy
which enables a man to escape infamy by a voluntary death. Furious at
the bitter contempt of the duchess, believing he saw a successor in the
young duke, M. de Saint-Remy resolved to confront Madame de Lucenay with
all insolence, and, if need were, to seek a quarrel with Conrad.

The duchess, irritated at Florestan's audacity, did not look towards
him, and M. de Montbrison, in his anxious attention to his cousin,
forgetting something of his high breeding, had not saluted or spoken a
word to the vicomte, with whom he was acquainted. The latter, advancing
to Conrad, whose back was towards him, touched his arm lightly, and
said, in a dry and ironical tone:

"Good evening, sir; a thousand pardons for not having observed you
before."

M. de Montbrison, perceiving that he had really failed in politeness,
turned around instantly, and said cordially to the vicomte:

"Really, sir, I am ashamed; but I hope that my cousin, who caused my
forgetfulness, will be my excuse, and--"

"Conrad," interposed the duchess, immeasurably annoyed at Florestan's
impudence, persisting as he did in remaining, as it were, to brave
her,--"Conrad, that will do; make no apologies; it is not worth while."

M. de Montbrison, believing that his cousin was reproaching him in joke
for being somewhat too formal, said, in a gay tone, to the vicomte, who
was livid with rage:

"I will not say more, sir, since my cousin forbids me. You see her
guardianship has begun."

"And will not stop when it begins, my dear sir, be assured of that.
Thus, with this notice (which Madame la Duchesse will hasten to fulfil,
I have no doubt)--with this notice, I say, I have it in my mind to make
you a proposal."

"To me, sir?" said Conrad, beginning to take offence at the sardonic
tone of Florestan.

"To you yourself. I leave in a few days for the legation to Gerolstein,
to which I am attached. I wish, therefore, to get my house, completely
furnished, and my stable, entirely arranged, off my hands; and you might
find it a suitable arrangement;" and the vicomte insolently emphasised
his last words, looking Madame de Lucenay full in the face. "It would be
very piquant, would it not, Madame la Duchesse?"

"I do not understand you, sir," said M. de Montbrison, more and more
astonished.

"I will tell you, Conrad, why you cannot accept the offer that is made
you," said Clotilde.

"And why, Madame la Duchesse, cannot the duke accept my offer?"

"My dear Conrad, what is offered you for sale is already sold to others.
So, you understand, you would have the inconvenience of being robbed
just as if you were in a wood."

Florestan bit his lips with rage.

"Take care, madame!" he cried.

"What, threats! and here, sir?" exclaimed Conrad.

"Pooh, pooh! Conrad, pay no attention," said Madame de Lucenay, taking a
lozenge from a sweetmeat box with the utmost composure; "a man of honour
ought not and cannot have any future communication with that person. If
he likes, I will tell you why."

A tremendous explosion would no doubt have occurred, when the two
folding-doors again opened, and the Duc de Lucenay entered, noisily,
violently, hurriedly, as was "his usual custom in the afternoon," as
well as the forenoon.

"Ah, my dear! What, dressed already?" said he to his wife. "Why, how
surprising! Quite astonishing! Good evening, Saint-Remy; good evening,
Conrad. Ah, you see the most miserable of men; that is to say, I neither
sleep nor eat, but am completely 'done up.' Can't reconcile myself to
it. Poor D'Harville, what an event!" And M. de Lucenay threw himself
back in a sort of small sofa with two backs, and, crossing his left knee
over his right, took his foot in his hand, whilst he continued to utter
the most distressing exclamations.

The excitement of Conrad and Florestan had time to calm down, without
being perceived by M. de Lucenay, who was the least clear-sighted man in
the world.

Madame de Lucenay, not from embarrassment, for she was never
embarrassed, as we know, but because Florestan's presence was as
disgusting as it was insupportable, said to the duke:

"We are ready to go as soon as you please. I am going to introduce
Conrad to Madame de Senneval."

"No, no, no!" cried the duke, letting go his foot to seize one of the
cushions, on which he struck violently with his two fists, to the great
alarm of Clotilde, who, at the sudden cries of her husband, started from
her chair.

"Monsieur, what ails you?" she inquired; "you frighten me exceedingly."

"No," replied the duke, thrusting the cushion from him, rising suddenly,
and walking up and down with rapid strides and gesticulations, "I cannot
get over the idea of the death of poor dear D'Harville; can you,
Saint-Remy?"

"Indeed, it was a frightful event!" said the vicomte, who, with hatred
and rage in his heart, kept his eye on M. de Montbrison; but this
latter, after the last words of his cousin, turned away from a man so
deeply degraded, not from want of feeling, but from pride.

"For goodness' sake, my lord," said the duchess to her husband, "do not
regret the loss of M. d'Harville in so noisy and really so singular a
manner. Ring, if you please for my carriage."

"Yes, it is really true," said M. de Lucenay, seizing the bell-rope,
"really true that, three days ago, he was full of life and health, and,
to-day, what remains of him? Nothing! Nothing! Nothing!"

These three last exclamations were accompanied by three such violent
pulls that the bell-rope, which the duke held in his hand whilst he was
gesticulating, broke away from the upper spring, fell on a candelabra
filled with lighted wax candles, knocked two of them out of the sconces,
one of which, falling on the mantelpiece, broke a lovely little cup of
old Sèvres china; whilst the other, falling on the ground, rolled on a
fur hearth rug, which took flame, but was soon extinguished under
Conrad's foot.

At the same moment, two _valets de chambre_, summoned by the furious
ringing, entered hastily, and found M. de Lucenay with the bell-rope in
his hand, the duchess laughing heartily at this ridiculous fall of the
wax lights, and M. de Montbrison sharing her mirth. M. de Saint-Remy
alone did not laugh. M. de Lucenay, quite accustomed to such accidents,
preserved his usual seriousness, and, throwing the bell-rope to one of
the men, said:

"The duchess's carriage."

Clotilde, having somewhat recovered her composure, said:

"Really, my lord, there is no man in the world but yourself capable of
exciting laughter at so lamentable an event."

"Lamentable! Say fearful. Why, now, only yesterday, I was recollecting
how many persons in my own family I would rather should have died than
poor D'Harville. First, there's my nephew, D'Emberval, who stutters so
annoyingly; then there's your Aunt Mérinville, who is always talking
about her nerves and her headache, and who always gobbles up every day,
whilst she is waiting for dinner, a mess of broth like a porter's wife.
Are you very fond of your Aunt Mérinville?"

"Really, my lord, have you lost your wits?" said the duchess, shrugging
her shoulders.

"It's true enough, though," continued the duke; "one would give twenty
indifferent persons for one friend; eh, Saint-Remy?"

"Unquestionably."

"It is the old story of the tailor over again. Do you know it,
Conrad,--the story of the tailor?"

"No, cousin."

"You will understand the allegory at once. A tailor was going to be
hanged; he was the only tailor in the village. What were the inhabitants
to do? They said to the judge, 'Please your judgeship, we have only one
tailor, and we have three shoemakers; if it is all the same to you,
please to hang one of the three shoemakers in the place of the tailor,
for two shoemakers are enough.' Do you understand the allegory, Conrad?"

"Yes, cousin."

"And you, Saint-Remy?"

"Quite."

"Her grace's carriage!" said one of the servants.

"But, I say, why haven't you put on your diamonds?" asked M. de Lucenay,
abruptly; "with that dress they would look remarkably well."

Saint-Remy shuddered.

"For the one poor time we are going out together," continued the duke,
"you might have done us the honour to wear your diamonds. The duchess's
diamonds are particularly fine. Did you ever see them, Saint-Remy?"

"Yes, he knows them well enough!" said Clotilde; and then she added,
"Your arm, Conrad."

M. de Lucenay followed the duchess with Saint-Remy, who could scarcely
repress his anger.

"Aren't you coming with us to the Sennevals, Saint-Remy?" inquired M. de
Lucenay.

"No, impossible," he replied, briefly.

"By the way, Saint-Remy, there's Madame de Senneval, too,--what, do I
say one? There's two--whom I would willingly sacrifice, for her husband
is also on my list."

"What list?"

"That of the people whom I should not have cared to see die, provided
D'Harville had been left to us."

At the moment when they were in the anteroom, and M. de Montbrison was
helping the duchess on with her mantle, M. de Lucenay, addressing his
cousin, said to him:

"Since you are coming with us, Conrad, desire your carriage to follow
ours; unless you will decide on coming, Saint-Remy, and then you shall
take me, and I will tell you another story quite as good as that of the
tailor."

"Thank you," said Saint-Remy, dryly, "I cannot accompany you."

"Well, then, good night, my dear fellow. Have you and my wife
quarrelled, for she is getting into her carriage without saying a word
to you?"

And at this moment, the duchess's berline having drawn up at the steps,
she entered it.

"Now, cousin," said Conrad, waiting for M. de Lucenay with an air of
deference.

"Get in! Get in!" said the duke, who had stopped a moment, and, from the
door, was contemplating the elegant equipage of the vicomte. "Are those
your grays, Saint-Remy?"

"Yes."

"And your jolly-looking Edwards! He's what I call a right sort of
coachman. How well he has his horses in hand! To do justice, there is no
one who, like Saint-Remy, does things in such devilish high style!"

"My dear fellow, Madame de Lucenay and your cousin are waiting for you,"
said M. de Saint-Remy, with bitterness.

"_Pardieu!_ and that's true. What a forgetful rascal I am! _Au revoir_,
Saint-Remy. Ah, I forgot," said the duke, stopping half way down the
steps, "if you have nothing better to do, come and dine with us
to-morrow. Lord Dudley has sent us some grouse from Scotland, and they
are out-of-the-way things, you know. You'll come, won't you?" And the
duke sprang into the carriage which contained his wife and Conrad.

Saint-Remy remained alone on the steps, and saw the carriage drive away.
His own then drove up. He got into it, casting on that house which he
had so often entered as master, and which now he so ignominiously
quitted, a look of anger, hatred, and despair.

"Home!" he said, abruptly.

"To the hôtel!" said the footman to Edwards, as he closed the door.

We may imagine how bitter and desolating were Saint-Remy's thoughts as
he returned to his house. At the moment when he reached it, Boyer, who
awaited him at the portico, said to him:

"M. le Comte is above, and waits for M. le Vicomte."

"Very well."

"And there is also a man whom your lordship appointed at ten o'clock,--a
M. Petit-Jean."

"Very well. Oh, what an evening party!" said Florestan, as he went
up-stairs to see his father, whom he found in the salon on the first
floor, the same room in which their meeting of the morning had taken
place. "A thousand pardons, my father, that I was not awaiting you when
you arrived; but I--"

"Is the man here who holds the forged bill?" inquired the comte,
interrupting his son.

"Yes, father, he is below."

"Desire him to come up."

Florestan rang, and Boyer appeared.

"Desire M. Petit-Jean to come up."

"Yes, my lord," and Boyer withdrew.

"How good you are, father, to remember your kind promise!"

"I always remember what I promise."

"What gratitude do I owe you! How can I ever prove to you--"

"I will not have my name dishonoured! It shall not be!"

"It shall not be! No, it shall never be, I swear to you, my father!"

The comte looked strangely at his son, and repeated:

"No, it shall never be!" Then he added, with a sarcastic air, "You are a
prophet."

"I read my resolution in my heart."

Florestan's father made no rejoinder. He walked up and down the room
with his two hands thrust into the pockets of his long coat. He was very
pale.

"M. Petit-Jean," said Boyer, introducing a man of a mean, sordid, and
crafty look.

"Where is the bill?" inquired the comte.

"Here it is, sir," said Petit-Jean (Jacques Ferrand the notary's man of
straw), handing the bill to the comte.

"Is this it?" said the latter, showing the bill to his son.

"Yes, father."

The comte took from his waistcoat pocket twenty-five notes of a thousand
francs each, handed them to his son, and said:

"Pay!"

Florestan paid, and took the bill with a deep sigh of the utmost
satisfaction. M. Petit-Jean put the notes carefully in an old
pocket-book, made his bow, and retired. M. de Saint-Remy left the salon
with him, whilst Florestan was very carefully tearing up the bill.

"At least Clotilde's twenty-five thousand francs are still in my pocket,
and if nothing is revealed, that is a comfort. But how she treated me!
But what can my father have to say to the man Petit-Jean?"

The noise of a door being double-locked made the vicomte start. His
father returned to the room. His pallor had even increased.

"I fancied, father, I heard you lock the door of my cabinet?"

"Yes, I did."

"And why, my dear father?" asked Florestan, greatly amazed.

"I will tell you."

And the comte placed himself so that his son could not pass out by the
secret staircase which led to the ground floor.

Florestan, greatly disquieted, now observed the sinister look of his
father, and followed all his movements with mistrust. Without being able
to account for it, he felt a vague alarm.

"What ails you, father?"

"This morning when you saw me, your only thought was, 'My father will
not allow his name to be dishonoured; he will pay if I can but contrive
to wheedle him by some feigned words of repentance.'"

"Can you indeed think--"

"Do not interrupt me. I have not been your dupe; you have neither shame,
regret, nor remorse. You are vicious to the very core, you have never
felt one honest aspiration, you have not robbed as long as you have been
in possession of wherewithal to gratify your caprices,--that is what is
called the probity of rich persons of your stamp. Then came the want of
delicate feeling, then meannesses, then crime, then forgery. This is but
the first period of your life,--it is bright and pure in comparison with
that which would be yet to come."

"If I did not change my conduct, assuredly; but I shall change it,
father, I have sworn to you."

"You will not change it."

"But--"

"You will not change it! Expelled from society in which you have
hitherto lived, you would become very quickly criminal, like the
wretches amongst whom you would be cast, a thief inevitably, and, if
your need were, an assassin. That would be your future life."

"I an assassin?--I?"

"Yes, because you are a coward!"

"I have had duels, and have evinced--"

"I tell you, you are a coward! You have already preferred infamy to
death. A day would come in which you would prefer the impunity for fresh
crimes to the life of another. This must not be,--I will not allow it. I
have come in time, at least, to save my name from public dishonour
hereafter. There must be an end to this."

"What do you mean, dearest father? How an end to this? What would you
imply?" exclaimed Florestan, still more alarmed at the fearful
expression and the increased pallor of his father's countenance.

Suddenly there was a violent blow struck on the cabinet door. Florestan
made a motion to go and open it, in order to put an end to a scene which
terrified him; but the comte seized him with a hand of iron, and held
him fast.

"Who knocks?" inquired the comte.

"In the name of the law, open! Open!" said a voice.

"That forgery, then, was not the last," exclaimed the comte, in a low
voice, and looking at his son with a terrible air.

"Yes, my father, I swear it!" exclaimed Florestan, endeavouring, but
vainly, to extricate himself from the vigorous grasp of his father.

"In the name of the law, open!" repeated the voice.

"What is it you seek?" demanded the comte.

"I am a commissary of police, and I have come to make a search after a
robbery of diamonds, of which M. de Saint-Remy is accused. M. Baudoin, a
jeweller, has proofs. If you do not open, sir, I shall be compelled to
force open the door."

"Already a thief! I was not then deceived," said the comte, in a low
voice. "I came to kill you,--I have delayed too long."

"Kill me?"

"There is already too much dishonour on my name,--it must end. I have
here two pistols; you must blow out your brains, or I will blow them
out, and I will say that you killed yourself in despair in order to
escape from shame."

And, with a fearful _sang-froid_, the comte drew a pistol from his
pocket, and, with the hand that was free, presented it to his son,
saying:

"Now an end to this, if, indeed, you are not a coward!"

After repeated and ineffectual attempts to free himself from the comte's
hand, his son fell back aghast and livid with fear. He saw by the
fearful look, the inexorable demeanour of his father, that he had no
pity to expect from him.

"My father!" he exclaimed.

"You must die!"

"I repent!"

"It is too late. Hark! They are forcing in the door!"

"I will expiate my faults!"

"They are entering! Must I then kill you with my own hand?"

"Pardon!"

"The door gives way! You will then have it so!"

And the comte placed the muzzle of the weapon against Florestan's
breast.

The noise without announced that the door of the cabinet could not long
resist. The vicomte saw he was lost. A sudden and desperate resolution
lighted up his countenance. He no longer struggled with his father, and
he said to him, with equal firmness and resignation:

"You are right, my father! Give me the pistol! There is infamy enough on
my name! The life in store for me is frightful, and is not worth the
trouble of a struggle. Give me the pistol! You shall see if I am a
coward!" and he put forth his hand to take the pistol. "But, at least,
one word,--one single word of consolation,--pity,--farewell!" said
Florestan; and his trembling lips, his paleness, his agitated features,
all betokened the terrible emotion of this frightful moment.

"But what if he were, indeed, my son!" thought the comte, with terror,
and hesitating to hand him the deadly instrument. "If he were my son I
ought to hesitate before such a sacrifice."

A loud cracking of the cabinet door announced that it was being forced.

"My father, they are coming! Oh, now I feel that death is indeed a
benefit. Yes, now I thank you! But, at least, your hand,--and forgive
me!"

In spite of his sternness, the comte could not repress a shudder, as he
said, in a voice of emotion:

"I forgive you."

"My father, the door opens; go to them, that, at least, they may not
even suspect you. Besides, if they enter here, they will prevent me from
completing,--adieu!"

The steps of several persons were heard in the next room. Florestan
placed the muzzle of the pistol to his heart. It went off at the instant
when the comte, to avoid the horrid sight, turned away his head, and
rushed out of the salon, whose curtains closed upon him.

At the sound of this explosion, at the sight of the comte, pale and
haggard, the commissary stopped short at the threshold of the door,
making a sign to his agents to pause also.

Informed by Boyer that the vicomte was shut up with his father, the
magistrate understood all, and respected his deep grief.

"Dead!" exclaimed the comte, hiding his face in his hands. "Dead!" he
repeated in a tone of agony. "It was just,--better death than infamy!
But it is horrible!"

"Sir," said the magistrate, sorrowfully, after a few minutes' silence,
"spare yourself a painful spectacle,--leave the house. And now I have
another duty to fulfil, even more painful than that which summoned me
hither."

"You are quite right, sir," said M. de Saint-Remy; "as to the sufferer
by this robbery, you will request him to call on M. Dupont, the banker."

"In the Rue Richelieu? He is very well known," replied the magistrate.

"What is the estimated value of the stolen diamonds?"

"About thirty thousand francs. The person who bought them, and by whom
the fraud was detected, gave that amount for them to your son."

"I can still pay it, sir. Let the jeweller go to my banker the day after
to-morrow, and I will have it all arranged."

The commissary bowed. The comte left the room.

After the departure of the latter, the magistrate, deeply affected by
this unlooked-for scene, went slowly towards the salon, the curtains of
which were closed. He moved them on one side with agitation.

"Nobody!" he exclaimed, amazed beyond measure, and looking around him,
unable to see the least trace of the tragic event which he believed had
just occurred.

Then, seeing a small door in the panel of the apartment, he went towards
it. It was fastened in the side of the secret staircase.

"It was a trick, and he has escaped by this door!" he exclaimed, with
vexation.

And in fact, the vicomte, having in his father's presence placed the
pistol on his heart, had very dexterously fired it under his arm, and
rapidly made off.

In spite of the most careful search throughout the house, they could not
discover Florestan.

During the conversation with his father and the commissary, he had
quickly gained the boudoir, then the conservatory, then the lone alley,
and so to the Champs Elysées.

       *       *       *       *       *

The picture of this ignoble degradation in opulence is a sad thing.

We are aware of it. But for want of warnings, the richer classes have
also fatally their miseries, vices, crimes. Nothing is more frequent and
more afflicting than those insensate, barren prodigalities which we have
now described, and which always entail ruin, loss of consideration,
baseness, or infamy. It is a deplorable, sad spectacle, just like
contemplating a flourishing field of wheat destroyed by a herd of wild
beasts. No doubt that inheritance, property, are, and ought to be,
inviolable, sacred. Wealth acquired or transmitted ought to be able to
shine with impunity and magnificently in the eyes of the poor and
suffering masses. We must, too, see those frightful disproportions which
exist between the millionaire Saint-Remy, and the artisan Morel. But,
inasmuch as these inevitable disproportions are consecrated, protected
by the law, so those who possess such wealth ought morally to be
accountable to those who have only probity, resignation, courage, and
desire to labour.

In the eyes of reason, human right, and even of a well-understood social
interest, a great fortune should be a hereditary deposit, confided to
prudent, firm, skilful, generous hands, which, entrusted at the same
time to fructify and expend this fortune, know how to fertilise, vivify,
and ameliorate all that should have the felicity to find themselves
within the scope of its splendid and salutary rays.

And sometimes it is so, but the instances are very rare. How many young
men, like Saint-Remy, masters at twenty of a large patrimony, spend it
foolishly in idleness, in waste, in vice, for want of knowing how to
employ their wealth more advantageously either for themselves or for the
public. Others, alarmed at the instability of human affairs, save in the
meanest manner. Thus there are those who, knowing that a fixed fortune
always diminishes, give themselves up, fools or rogues, to that
hazardous, immoral gaming, which the powers that be encourage and
patronise.

How can it be otherwise? Who imparts to inexperienced youth that
knowledge, that instruction, those rudiments of individual and social
economy? No one.

The rich man is thrown into the heart of society with his riches, as the
poor man with his poverty. No one takes any more care of the
superfluities of the one than of the wants of the other. No one thinks
any more of making the one moralise than the other. Ought not power to
fulfil this great and noble task?

If, taking to its pity the miseries, the continually increasing
troubles, of the still resigned workmen, repressing a rivalry injurious
to all, and, addressing itself finally to the imminent question of the
organisation of labour, it gave itself the salutary lesson of the
association of capital and labour; and if there were an honourable,
intelligent, equitable association, which should assure the well-doing
of the artisan, without injuring the fortune of the rich, and which,
establishing between the two classes the bonds of affection and
gratitude, would for ever keep safeguard over the tranquillity of the
state,--how powerful, then, would be the consequences of such a
practical instruction!

Amongst the rich, who then would hesitate as to the dishonourable,
disastrous chances of stock-jobbing, the gross pleasures of avarice, the
foolish vanities of a ruinous dissipation; or, a means at once
remunerative and beneficial, which would shed ease, morality, happiness,
and joy, over scores of families?




CHAPTER XIII.

THE ADIEUX.


The day after that on which the Comte de Saint-Remy had been so
shamefully tricked by his son, a touching scene took place at St. Lazare
at the hour of recreation amongst the prisoners.

On this day, during the walk of the other prisoners, Fleur-de-Marie was
seated on a bench close to the fountain of the courtyard, which was
already named "La Goualeuse's Bench." By a kind of taciturn agreement,
the prisoners had entirely given up this seat to her, as she had evinced
a marked preference for it,--for the young girl's influence had
decidedly increased. La Goualeuse had selected this bench, situated
close to the basin, because the small quantity of moss which velveted
the margin of the reservoir reminded her of the verdure of the fields,
as the clear water with which it was filled reminded her of the small
river of Bouqueval. To the saddened gaze of a prisoner a tuft of grass
is a meadow, a flower is a garden.

Relying on the kind promises of Madame d'Harville, Fleur-de-Marie had
for two days expected her release from St. Lazare. Although she had no
reason for being anxious about the delay in her discharge, the young
girl, from her experience in misfortune, scarcely ventured to hope for a
speedy liberation. Since her return amongst creatures whose appearance
revived at each moment in her mind the incurable memory of her early
disgrace, Fleur-de-Marie's sadness had become more and more
overwhelming. This was not all. A new subject of trouble, distress, and
almost alarm to her, had arisen from the impassioned excitement of her
gratitude towards Rodolph.

It was strange, but she only fathomed the depth of the abyss into which
she had been plunged, in order to measure the distance which separated
her from him whose perfection appeared to her more than human, from this
man whose goodness was so extreme, and his power so terrible to the
wicked. In spite of the respect with which her adoration for him was
imbued, sometimes, alas! Fleur-de-Marie feared to detect in this
adoration the symptoms of love, but of a love as secret as it was deep,
as chaste as it was secret, and as hopeless as it was chaste. The
unhappy girl had not thought of reading this withering revelation in her
heart until after her interview with Madame d'Harville, who was herself
smitten with a love for Rodolph, of which he himself was ignorant.

After the departure and the promises of the marquise, Fleur-de-Marie
should have been transported with joy on thinking of her friends at
Bouqueval, of Rodolph whom she was again about to see. But she was not.
Her heart was painfully distressed, and to her memory occurred
incessantly the severe language, the haughty scrutiny, the angry looks,
of Madame d'Harville, as the poor prisoner had been excited to
enthusiasm when alluding to her benefactor. By singular intuition La
Goualeuse had thus detected a portion of Madame d'Harville's secret.

"The excess of my gratitude to M. Rodolph offended this young lady, so
handsome and of such high rank," thought Fleur-de-Marie; "now I
comprehend the severity of her words, they expressed a jealous disdain.
She jealous of me! Then she must love him, and I must love, too--him?
Yes, and my love must have betrayed itself in spite of me! Love
him,--I--I--a creature fallen for ever, ungrateful and wretched as I
am! Oh, if it were so, death were a hundred times preferable!"

Let us hasten to say that the unhappy girl, thus a martyr to her
feelings, greatly exaggerated what she called her love.

To her profound gratitude towards Rodolph was united involuntary
admiration of the gracefulness, strength, and manly beauty which
distinguished him from other men. Nothing could be less gross, more
pure, than this admiration; but it existed in full and active force,
because physical beauty is always attractive. And then the voice of
blood, so often denied, mute, unknown, or misinterpreted, is sometimes
in full force, and these throbs of passionate tenderness which attracted
Fleur-de-Marie towards Rodolph, and which so greatly startled her,
because in her ignorance she misinterpreted their tendency, these
feelings resulted from mysterious sympathies, as palpable, but as
inexplicable, as the resemblance of features. In a word, Fleur-de-Marie,
on learning that she was Rodolph's daughter, could have accounted to
herself for the strong affection she had for him, and thus, completely
enlightened on the point, she would have admired without a scruple her
father's manly beauty.

Thus do we explain Fleur-de-Marie's dejection. Although she was every
instant awaiting, according to Madame d'Harville's promise, her release
from St. Lazare, Fleur-de-Marie, melancholy and pensive, was seated on
her bench near the basin, looking with a kind of mechanical interest at
the sports of some bold little birds who came to play on the margin of
the stone-work. She had ceased for an instant to work at a baby's
nightgown, which she had just finished hemming. Need we say that this
nightgown belonged to the lying-in clothes so generously offered to Mont
Saint-Jean by the prisoners, through the kind intervention of
Fleur-de-Marie? The poor misshapen protégée of La Goualeuse was sitting
at her feet, working at a small cap, and, from time to time, casting at
her benefactress a look at once grateful, timid, and confiding, such a
look as a dog throws at his master. The beauty, attraction, and
delicious sweetness of Fleur-de-Marie had inspired this fallen creature
with sentiments of the most profound respect.

There is always something holy and great in the aspirations of a heart,
which, although degraded, yet feels for the first time sensations of
gratitude; and, up to this time, no one had ever given Mont Saint-Jean
the opportunity of even testifying whether or not she could comprehend
the religious ardour of a sentiment so wholly unknown to her. After some
moments Fleur-de-Marie shuddered slightly, wiped a tear from her eyes,
and resumed her sewing with much activity.

"You will not then leave off your work even during the time for rest, my
good angel?" said Mont Saint-Jean to La Goualeuse.

"I have not given you any money towards buying your lying-in clothes,
and I must therefore furnish my part with my own work," replied the
young girl.

"Your part! Why, but for you, instead of this good white linen, this
nice warm wrapper for my child, I should have nothing but the rags they
dragged in the mud of the yard. I am very grateful to my companions who
have been so very kind to me; that's quite true! But you!--ah, you!--how
can I tell you all I feel?" added the poor creature, hesitating, and
greatly embarrassed how to express her thought. "There," she said,
"there is the sun, is it not? That is the sun?"

"Yes, Mont Saint-Jean; I am attending to you," replied Fleur-de-Marie,
stooping her lovely face towards the hideous countenance of her
companion.

"Ah, you'll laugh at me," she replied, sorrowfully. "I want to say
something, and I do not know how."

"Oh, yes, say it, Mont Saint-Jean!"

"How kind you look always," said the prisoner, looking at
Fleur-de-Marie in a sort of ecstasy; "your eyes encourage me,--those
kind eyes! Well, then, I will try and say what I wish: There is the sun,
is it not? It is so warm, it lights up the prison, it is very pleasant
to see and feel, isn't it?"

"Certainly."

"But I have an idea,--the sun didn't make itself, and if we are grateful
to it, why, there is greater reason still why--"

"Why we should be grateful to him who created it; that is what you mean,
Mont Saint-Jean? You are right; and we ought to pray to, adore him,--he
is God!"

"Yes, that is my idea!" exclaimed the prisoner, joyously. "That is it! I
ought to be grateful to my companions, but I ought to pray to, adore
you, Goualeuse, for it is you who made them so good to me, instead of
being so unkind as they had been."

"It is God you should thank, Mont Saint-Jean, and not me."

"Yes, yes, yes, it is you, I see you; and it is you who did me such
kindness, by yourself and others."

"But if I am as good as you say, Mont Saint-Jean, it is God who has made
me so, and it is he, therefore, whom we ought to thank."

"Ah, indeed, it may be so since you say it!" replied the prisoner, whose
mind was by no means decided; "and if you desire it, let it be so; as
you please."

"Yes, my poor Mont Saint-Jean, pray to him constantly, that is the best
way of proving to me that you love me a little."

"If I love you, Goualeuse? Don't you remember, then, what you said to
those other prisoners to prevent them from beating me?--'It is not only
her whom you beat, it is her child also!' Well, it is all the same as
the way I love you; it is not only for myself that I love you, but also
for my child."

"Thanks, thanks, Mont Saint-Jean, you please me exceedingly when you say
that." And Fleur-de-Marie, much moved, extended her hand to her
companion.

"What a pretty, little, fairy-like hand! How white and small!" said Mont
Saint-Jean, receding as though she were afraid to touch it with her
coarse and clumsy hands.

Yet, after a moment's hesitation, she respectfully applied her lips to
the end of the slender fingers which Fleur-de-Marie extended to her,
then, kneeling suddenly, she fixed on her an attentive, concentrated
look.

"Come and sit here by me," said La Goualeuse.

"Oh, no, indeed; never, never!"

"Why not?"

"Respect discipline, as my brave Mont Saint-Jean used to say; soldiers
together, officers together, each with his equals."

"You are crazy; there is no difference between us two."

"No difference! And you say that when I see you, as I do now, as
handsome as a queen. Oh, what do you mean now? Leave me alone, on my
knees, that I may look at you as I do now. Who knows, although I am a
real monster, my child may perhaps resemble you? They say that sometimes
happens from a look."

Then by a scruple of incredible delicacy in a creature of her position,
fearing, perhaps, that she had humiliated or wounded Fleur-de-Marie by
her strange desire, Mont Saint-Jean added, sorrowfully:

"No, no, I was only joking, Goualeuse; I never could allow myself to
look at you with such an idea,--unless with your free consent. If my
child is as ugly as I am, what shall I care? I sha'n't love it any the
less, poor little, unhappy thing; it never asked to be born, as they
say. And if it lives what will become of it?" she added, with a mournful
and reflective air. "Alas, yes, what will become of us?"

La Goualeuse shuddered at these words. In fact, what was to become of
the child of this miserable, degraded, abased, poor, despised creature?

"What a fate! What a future!"

"Do not think of that, Mont Saint-Jean," said Fleur-de-Marie; "let us
hope that your child will find benevolent friends in its way."

"That chance never occurs twice, Goualeuse," replied Mont Saint-Jean,
bitterly, and shaking her head. "I have met with you, that is a great
chance; and then--no offence--I should much rather my child had had that
good luck than myself, and that wish is all I can do for it!"

"Pray, pray, and God will hear you."

"Well, I will pray, if that is any pleasure to you, Goualeuse, for it
may perhaps bring me good luck. Indeed, who could have thought, when La
Louve beat me, and I was the butt of all the world, that I should meet
with my little guardian angel, who with her pretty soft voice would be
even stronger than all the rest, and that La Louve who is so strong and
so wicked--"

"Yes, but La Louve became very good to you as soon as she reflected that
you were doubly to be pitied."

"Yes, that is very true, thanks to you; I shall never forget it. But,
tell me, Goualeuse, why did she the other day request to have her
quarters changed,--La Louve, she, who, in spite of her passionate
temper, seemed unable to do without you?"

"She is rather wilful."

"How odd! A woman, who came this morning from the quarter of the prison
where La Louve now is, says that she is wholly changed."

"How?"

"Instead of quarrelling and contending with everybody, she is sad, quite
sad, and sits by herself, and if they speak to her she turns her back
and makes no answer. It is really wonderful to see her quite still, who
used always to be making such a riot; and then the woman says another
thing, which I really cannot believe."

"And what is that?"

"Why, that she had seen La Louve crying; La Louve crying,--that's
impossible!"

"Poor Louve! It was on my account she changed her quarters; I vexed her
without intending it," said La Goualeuse, with a sigh.

"You vex any one, my good angel?"

At this moment, the inspectress, Madame Armand, entered the yard. After
having looked for Fleur-de-Marie, she came towards her with a smiling
and satisfied air.

"Good news, my child."

"What do you mean, madame?" said La Goualeuse, rising.

"Your friends have not forgotten you, they have obtained your discharge;
the governor has just received the information."

"Can it be possible, madame? Ah, what happiness!"

Fleur-de-Marie's emotion was so violent that she turned pale, placed her
hand on her heart, which throbbed violently, and fell back on the seat.

"Don't agitate yourself, my poor girl," said Madame Armand, kindly.
"Fortunately these shocks are not dangerous."

"Ah, madame, what gratitude!"

"No doubt it is Madame d'Harville who has obtained your liberty. There
is an elderly female charged to conduct you to the persons who are
interested in you. Wait for me, I will return for you; I have some
directions to give in the work-room."

It would be difficult to paint the expression of extreme desolation
which overcast the features of Mont Saint-Jean, when she learned that
her good angel, as she called La Goualeuse, was about to quit St.
Lazare. This woman's grief was less caused by the fear of becoming
again the ill-used butt of the prison, than by her anguish at seeing
herself separated from the only being who had ever testified any
interest in her.

Still seated at the foot of the bench, Mont Saint-Jean lifted both her
hands to the sides of her matted and coarse hair, which projected in
disorder from the sides of her old black cap, as if to tear them out;
then this deep affliction gave way to dejection, and she drooped her
head and remained mute and motionless, with her face hidden in her
hands, and her elbows resting on her knees.

In spite of her joy at leaving the prison, Fleur-de-Marie could not help
shuddering when she thought for an instant of the Chouette and the
Schoolmaster, recollecting that these two monsters had made her swear
never to inform her benefactors of her wretched fate. But these
dispiriting thoughts were soon effaced from Fleur-de-Marie's mind before
the hope of seeing Bouqueval once more, with Madame Georges and Rodolph,
to whom she meant to intercede for La Louve and Martial. It even seemed
to her that the warm feeling which she reproached herself for having of
her benefactor, being no longer nourished by sadness and solitude, would
be calmed down as soon as she resumed her rustic occupations, which she
so much delighted in sharing with the good and simple inhabitants of the
farm.

Astonished at the silence of her companion, a silence whose source she
did not suspect, La Goualeuse touched her gently on the shoulder, saying
to her:

"Mont Saint-Jean, as I am now free, can I be in any way useful to you?"

The prisoner trembled as she felt La Goualeuse's hand upon her, let her
hands drop on her knees, and turned towards the young girl, her face
streaming with tears. So bitter a grief overspread the features of Mont
Saint-Jean that their ugliness had disappeared.

"What is the matter?" said La Goualeuse. "You are weeping!"

"You are going away!" murmured the poor prisoner, with a voice broken by
sobs. "And I had never thought that you would go away, and that I should
never see you more,--never, no, never!"

"I assure you that I shall always think of your good feeling towards me,
Mont Saint-Jean."

"Oh, and to think how I loved you, when I was sitting there at your feet
on the ground! It seemed as if I was saved,--that I had nothing more to
fear! It was not for the blows which the other women may, perhaps, begin
again to give me that I said that I have led a hard life; but it seemed
to me that you were my good fortune, and would bring good luck to my
child, just because you had pity on me. But, then, when one is used to
be ill-treated, one is then more sensible than others to kindness."
Then, interrupting herself, to burst again into a loud fit of
sobs,--"Well, well, it's done,--it's finished,--all over! And so it must
be some day or other. I was wrong to think any otherwise. It's
done--done--done!"

"Courage! Courage! I will think of you, as you will remember me."

"Oh, as to that, they may tear me to pieces before they shall ever make
me forget you! I may grow old,--as old as the streets,--but I shall
always have your angel face before me. The first word I will teach my
child shall be your name, Goualeuse; for but for you it would have
perished with cold."

"Listen to me, Mont Saint-Jean!" said Fleur-de-Marie, deeply affected by
the attachment of this unhappy woman. "I cannot promise to do anything
for you, although I know some very charitable persons; but, for your
child, it is a different thing; it is wholly innocent; and the persons
of whom I speak will, perhaps, take charge of it, and bring it up, when
you can resolve on parting from it."

"Part from it! Never, oh, never!" exclaimed Mont Saint-Jean, with
excitement. "What would become of me now, when I have so built upon it?"

"But how will you bring it up? Boy or girl, it ought to be made honest;
and for that--"

"It must eat honest bread. I know that, Goualeuse,--I believe it. It is
my ambition; and I say so to myself every day. So, in leaving here, I
will never put my foot under a bridge again. I will turn rag-picker,
street-sweeper,--something honest; for I owe that, if not to myself, at
least to my child, when I have the honour of having one," she added,
with a sort of pride.

"And who will take care of your child whilst you are at work?" inquired
the Goualeuse. "Will it not be better, if possible, as I hope it will
be, to put it in the country with some worthy people, who will make a
good country girl or a stout farmer's boy of it? You can come and see it
from time to time; and one day you may, perhaps, find the means to live
near it constantly. In the country, one lives on so little!"

"Yes, but to separate myself from it,--to separate myself from it! It
would be my only joy,--I, who have nothing else in the world to
love,--nothing that loves me!"

"You must think more of it than of yourself, my poor Mont Saint-Jean. In
two or three days I will write to Madame Armand, and if the application
I mean to make in favour of your child should succeed, you will have no
occasion to say to it, as you said so painfully just now, 'Alas! What
will become of it?'"

Madame Armand interrupted this conversation, and came to seek
Fleur-de-Marie. After having again burst into sobs, and bathed with her
despairing tears the young girl's hands, Mont Saint-Jean fell on the
seat perfectly overcome, not even thinking of the promise which
Fleur-de-Marie had just made with respect to her child.

"Poor creature!" said Madame Armand, as she quitted the yard,
accompanied by Fleur-de-Marie, "her gratitude towards you gives me a
better opinion of her."

Learning that La Goualeuse was discharged, the other prisoners, far from
envying her this favour, displayed their delight. Some of them
surrounded Fleur-de-Marie, and took leave of her with adieux full of
cordiality, frankly congratulating her on her speedy release from
prison.

"Well, I must say," said one, "this little fair girl has made us pass an
agreeable moment, when we agreed to make up the basket of clothes for
Mont Saint-Jean. That will be remembered at St. Lazare."

When Fleur-de-Marie had quitted the prison buildings, the inspectress
said to her:

"Now, my dear child, go to the clothing-room, and leave your prison
clothes. Put on your peasant girl's clothes, whose rustic simplicity
suits you so well. Adieu! You will be happy, for you are going to be
under the protection of good people, and leave these walls, never again
to return to them. But I am really hardly reasonable," said Madame
Armand, whose eyes were moistened with tears. "I really cannot conceal
from you how much I am attached to you, my poor girl!" Then, seeing the
tears in Fleur-de-Marie's eyes, the inspectress added, "But we must not
sadden your departure thus."

"Ah, madame, is it not through your recommendation that this young lady
to whom I owe my liberty has become interested in me?"

"Yes, and I am happy that I did so; my presentiments had not deceived
me."

At this moment a clock struck.

"That is the hour of work; I must return to the rooms. Adieu! Once more
adieu, my dear child!"

Madame Armand, as much affected as Fleur-de-Marie, embraced her
tenderly, and then said to one of the women employed in the
establishment:

"Take mademoiselle to the vestiary."

A quarter of an hour afterwards, Fleur-de-Marie, dressed like a peasant
girl, as we have seen her at the farm at Bouqueval, entered the
waiting-room, where Madame Séraphin was expecting her. The housekeeper
of the notary, Jacques Ferrand, had come to seek the unhappy girl, and
conduct her to the Isle du Ravageur.




CHAPTER XIV.

RECOLLECTIONS.


Jacques Ferrand had quickly and readily obtained the liberty of
Fleur-de-Marie, which, indeed, only required a simple official order.
Instructed by the Chouette of La Goualeuse being at St. Lazare, he had
immediately applied to one of his clients, an honourable and influential
man, saying that a young female who had once erred, but afterwards
sincerely repented, being now confined in St. Lazare, was in danger of
forgetting her good resolutions, in consequence of her association with
the other prisoners. This young girl having been (added the notary)
strongly recommended to him by persons of high respectability, who
wanted to take care of her when she quitted the prison, he besought his
client, in the name of religion, virtue, and the future return to
goodness of the poor girl, to interest himself in obtaining her
liberation. And, further to screen himself from all chance of future
consequences, the notary most earnestly charged his client not to allow
his name to transpire in the business on any account, as he was desirous
of avoiding any mention of having been employed in the furtherance of so
good and charitable a work.

This request, which was attributed to the unassuming modesty and
benevolence of Jacques Ferrand, a man equally esteemed for his piety as
for honour and probity, was strictly complied with, the liberation of
Fleur-de-Marie being asked and obtained in the client's name alone; and
by way of evincing a still greater regard for the shrinking delicacy of
the notary's nature, the order for quitting the prison was sent under
cover to Jacques Ferrand, that he might send it on to the parties
interesting themselves for the young girl. And when Madame Séraphin
presented the order to the directors of the prison, she stated herself
to have been sent by the parties feeling a desire to save the young
person it referred to.

From the favourable manner in which the matron of the prison had spoken
to Madame d'Harville of Fleur-de-Marie, not a doubt existed as to its
being to that lady La Goualeuse was indebted for her return to freedom.
There was, therefore, no chance of the appearance of Madame Séraphin
exciting any mistrust in the mind of her victim. Madame Séraphin could
so well assume the look and manner of what is commonly styled "a nice
motherly kind of person," that it required a more than ordinary share of
penetration to discover a strong proportion of falsehood, deceit, and
cunning behind the smooth glance or the hypocritical smile; but, spite
of the hardened villainy with which she had shared so long and deeply in
the nefarious practices of her employer, Madame Séraphin, old and
hackneyed as she was, could not view without emotion the exquisite
loveliness of the being her own hand had surrendered, even as a child,
to the cruel care of the Chouette, and whom she was now leading to an
inevitable death.

"Well, my dear," cried Madame Séraphin, speaking in a tone of honeyed
sweetness, as Fleur-de-Marie drew near, "I suppose you are very glad to
get away from prison."

"Oh, yes, indeed, ma'am. I presume it is Madame d'Harville who has had
the goodness to obtain my liberty for me?"

"You are not mistaken in your guess. But, come, we are already a little
behindhand, and we have still some distance to go."

"We are going to Madame Georges at the farm at Bouqueval, are we not,
madame?" cried La Goualeuse.

"Oh, yes, certainly, by all means!" answered the _femme de charge_, in
order to avert all suspicion from the mind of her victim. "Yes, my dear,
we are going into the country, as you say;" and then added, with a sort
of good-humoured teasing, "But that is not all; before you see Madame
Georges, a little surprise awaits you--Come, come, our coach is waiting
below! Ah, how you will be astonished by and by! Come, then, let us go.
Your most obedient servant, gentlemen!"

And, with a multitude of bows and salutations from Madame Séraphin to
the registrar, his clerk, and all the various members of the
establishment then and there assembled, she descended the stairs with La
Goualeuse, followed by an officer, to command the opening of the gates
through which they had to pass. The last had just closed behind them,
and the two females found themselves beneath the vast porch which looks
out upon the street of the Faubourg St. Denis, when they nearly ran
against a young female, who appeared hurrying towards the prison, as
though full of anxiety to visit one of its inmates. It was Rigolette, as
pretty and light-footed as ever, her charming face set off by a simple
yet becoming cap, tastefully ornamented with cherry-coloured riband;
while her dark brown hair was laid in bright glossy bands down each
clear and finely rounded cheek. She was wrapped in a plaid shawl, over
which fell a snowy muslin collar, secured by a small knot of riband. On
her arm she carried a straw basket; while, thanks to her light, careful
way of picking her steps, her thick-soled boots were scarcely soiled;
and yet the poor girl had walked far that day.

"Rigolette!" exclaimed Fleur-de-Marie, as she recognised her old prison
companion, and the sharer in her rural excursions.[7]

  [7] The reader will, perhaps, recollect that in the recital
  made by La Goualeuse to Rodolph, at their first meeting at the
  ogress's, of the early events of her life, she spoke to him of
  Rigolette, who, a friendless child like herself, had been
  (with her) confined in a _maison de detention_ until she had
  reached the age of sixteen.

"La Goualeuse!" returned the grisette, and with one accord the two girls
threw themselves into each other's arms.

Nothing more touchingly beautiful could be imagined than the contrast
between these two young creatures, both so lovely, though differing so
entirely from one another in appearance: the one exquisitely fair, with
large, melancholy blue eyes, and an outline of feature of faultless
purity, the pale, pensive, intellectual cast of the whole countenance
reminding the observer of one of those sweet designs of a village maid
by Greuze,--the same clear delicacy of complexion, the same ineffable
mixture of graceful pensiveness and candid innocence; the other a
sparkling brunette, with round rosy cheek and bright black eyes, set off
by a laughing, dimpled face and mirthful air,--the very impersonation of
youthful gaiety and light-heartedness, the rare and touching specimen of
happy poverty, of contented labour, and honest industry!

After the first burst of their affectionate greetings had passed away,
the two girls regarded each other with close and tender scrutiny. The
features of Rigolette were radiant with the joy she experienced at this
unexpected meeting; Fleur-de-Marie, on the contrary, felt humbled and
confused at the sight of her early friend, which recalled but too
vividly to her mind the few days of peaceful calm she had known previous
to her first degradation.

"Dear, dear Goualeuse!" exclaimed the grisette, fixing her bright eyes
with intense delight on her companion. "To think of meeting you at
last, after so long an absence!"

"It is, indeed, a delightful surprise!" replied Fleur-de-Marie. "It is
so very long since we have seen each other."

"Ah, but now," said Rigolette, for the first time remarking the rustic
habiliments of La Goualeuse, "I can account for seeing nothing of you
during the last six months,--you live in the country, I see?"

"Yes," answered Fleur-de-Marie, casting down her eyes, "I have done so
for some time past."

"And I suppose that, like me, you have come to see some friend in this
prison?"

"Yes," stammered poor Fleur-de-Marie, blushing up to her eyes with shame
and confusion; "I was going--I mean I have just been seeing some one,
and, of course, am now returning home."

"You live a good way out of Paris, I dare say? Ah, you dear, kind girl!
It is just like you to come all this distance to perform a good action.
Do you remember the poor lying-in woman to whom you gave, not only your
mattress, with the necessary baby-clothes, but even what money you had
left, and which we meant to have spent in a country excursion; for you
were then crazy for the country, my pretty village maid?"

"And you, who cared nothing about it, how very good-natured and obliging
of you to go thither, merely for the sake of pleasing me!"

"Well, but I pleased myself at the same time. Why, you, who were always
inclined to be grave and serious, when once you got among the fields, or
found yourself in the thick shade of a wood, oh, then, what a wild,
overjoyed little madcap you became! Nobody would have fancied it the
same person,--flying after the butterflies,--crowding your hands and
apron with more flowers than either could hold. It made me quite
delighted to see you! It was quite treat enough for a week to recollect
all your happiness and enjoyment. But do let me have another look at
you: how sweetly pretty you look in that nice little round cap! Yes,
decidedly, you were cut out to be a country girl,--just as much as I was
to be a Paris grisette. Well, I hope you are happy, since you have got
the sort of line you prefer; and, certainly, after all, I cannot say I
was so very much astonished at your never coming near me. 'Oh,' said I,
'that dear Goualeuse is not suited for Paris; she is a true wild flower,
as the song says; and the air of great cities is not for them. So,' said
I, 'my pretty, dear Goualeuse has found a place in some good honest
family who live in the country.' And I was right, was I not, dear?"

"Yes," said Fleur-de-Marie, nearly sinking with confusion, "quite
right."

"There is only one thing I have to reproach you for."

"Reproach me?" inquired Fleur-de-Marie, looking tearfully at her
companion.

"Yes, you ought to have let me know before you went. You should have
said 'good-bye,' if you were only leaving me at night to return in the
morning; or, at any rate, you should have sent me word how you were
going on."

"I--I--quitted Paris so suddenly," stammered out Fleur-de-Marie,
becoming momentarily more and more embarrassed, "that, indeed--I--was
not able--"

"Oh, I'm not at all angry! I don't speak of it to scold you! I am far
too happy in meeting you unexpectedly; and, besides, I commend you for
getting out of such a dangerous place as Paris, where it is so difficult
to earn a quiet livelihood; for, you know, two poor friendless girls
like you and me might be led into mischief, without thinking of, or
intending, any harm. When there is no person to advise, it leaves one so
very defenceless; and then come a parcel of deceitful, flattering men,
with their false promises, when, perhaps, want and misery are staring
you in the face. There, for instance, do you recollect that pretty girl
called Julie?--and Rosine, who had such a beautiful fair skin, and such
coal black eyes?"

"Oh, yes, I recollect them very well!"

"Then, my dear Goualeuse, you will be extremely sorry to hear that they
were both led astray, seduced, and deserted, till at last, from one
unfortunate step to another, they have become like the miserable
creatures confined in this prison!"

"Merciful Heaven!" exclaimed Fleur-de-Marie, hanging down her head, and
blushing the deep blush of shame.

Rigolette, misinterpreting the real cause of her friend's exclamation,
continued:

"I admit that their conduct is wrong, nay wicked; but then, you know, my
dear Goualeuse, because you and I have been so fortunate as to preserve
ourselves from harm,--you, because you have been living with good and
virtuous people in the country, out of the reach of temptation; and I,
because I had no time to waste in listening to a set of make-believe
lovers; and also because I found greater pleasure in having a few birds,
and in trying to get things a little comfortable and snug around me,--I
say, it is not for you and me to be too severe with others; and God
alone knows whether opportunity, deceit, and destitution may not have
had much to do in causing the misery and disgrace of Julie and Rosine!
And who can say whether, in their place, we might not have acted as they
have done?"

"Alas!" cried Fleur-de-Marie, "I accuse them not; on the contrary, I
pity them from my heart!"

"Come, come, my dear child!" interrupted Madame Séraphin, impatiently
offering her arm to her victim, "you forget that I said we were already
behind our time."

"Pray, madame, grant us a little more time," said Rigolette. "It is so
very long since I saw my dear Goualeuse!"

"I should be glad to do so," replied Madame Séraphin, much annoyed at
this meeting between the two friends; "but it is now three o'clock, and
we have a long way to go. However, I will manage to allow you ten
minutes longer gossip. So pray make the best of your time."

"And tell me, I pray, of yourself," said Fleur-de-Marie, affectionately
pressing the hands of Rigolette between her own. "Are you still the same
merry, light-hearted, and happy creature I always knew you?"

"I was happy and gay enough a few days ago; but now--"

"You sorrowful? I can hardly believe it."

"Ah, but indeed I am! Not that I am at all changed from what you always
found me,--a regular Roger Bontemps,--one to whom nothing was a trouble.
But then, you see, everybody is not like me; so that, when I see those I
love unhappy, why, naturally, that makes me unhappy, too."

"Still the same kind, warm-hearted girl!"

"Why, who could help being grieved as I am? Just imagine my having come
hither to visit a poor young creature,--a sort of neighbouring lodger in
the house where I live,--as meek and mild as a lamb she was, poor thing!
Well, she has been most shamefully and unjustly accused,--that she has;
never mind of what just now! Her name is Louise Morel. She is the
daughter of an honest and deserving man, a lapidary, who has gone mad in
consequence of her being put in prison."

At the name of Louise Morel, one of the victims of the notary's
villainy, Madame Séraphin started, and gazed earnestly at Rigolette. The
features of the grisette were, however, perfectly unknown to her;
nevertheless, from that instant, the _femme de charge_ listened with an
attentive ear to the conversation of the two girls.

"Poor thing," continued the Goualeuse; "how happy it must make her to
find that you have not forgotten her in her misfortunes!"

"And that is not all; it really seems as though some spell hung over me!
But, truly and positively, this is the second poor prisoner I have left
my home to-day to visit! I have come a long way, and also from a
prison,--but that was a place of confinement for men."

"You, Rigolette,--in a prison for men?"

"Yes, I have, indeed. I have a very dejected customer there, I can
assure you. There,--you see my basket; it is divided in two parts, and
each of my poor friends has an equal share in its contents. I have got
some clean things here for poor Louise, and I have left a similar packet
with Germain,--that is the name of my other poor captive. I cannot help
feeling ready to cry when I think of our last interview. I know it will
do no good, but still, for all that, the tears will come into my eyes."

"But what is it that distresses you so much?"

"Why, because, you see, poor Germain frets so much at being mixed up in
his prison with the many bad characters that are there, that it has
quite broken his spirits; he seems to have no taste, no relish for
anything, has quite lost his appetite, and is wasting away daily. So,
when I perceived the change, I said to myself: 'Oh, poor fellow, I see
he eats nothing. I must make him something nice and delicate to tempt
his appetite a little; he shall have one of those little dainties he
used to be so fond of when he and I were next-room neighbours.' When I
say dainties, of course I don't mean such as rich people expect by that
name. No, no, my dish was merely some beautiful mealy potatoes, mashed
with a little milk and sugar. Well, my dear Goualeuse, I prepared this
for him, put it in a nice little china basin and took it to him in his
prison, telling him I had brought him a little titbit he used once to be
fond of, and which I hoped he would like as well as in former days. I
told him I had prepared it entirely myself, hoping to make him relish
it. But alas, no! What do you think?"

"Oh, what?"

"Why, instead of increasing his appetite, I only set him crying; for,
when I displayed my poor attempts at cookery, he seemed to take no
notice of anything but the basin, out of which he had been accustomed to
see me take my milk when we supped together; and then he burst into
tears, and, by way of making matters still better, I began to cry, too,
although I tried all I could to restrain myself. You see how everything
went against me. I had gone with the intention of enlivening his
spirits, and, instead of that, there I was making him more melancholy
than ever."

"Still, the tears he shed were, no doubt, sweet and consoling tears!"

"Oh, never mind what sort of tears they were, that was not the way I
meant to have consoled him. But la! All this while I am talking to you
of Germain as if you knew him. He is an old acquaintance of mine, one of
the best young men in the world, as timid and gentle as any young girl
could be, and whom I loved as a friend and a brother."

"Oh, then, of course, his troubles became yours also."

"To be sure. But just let me show you what a good heart he must have.
When I was coming away, I asked him as usual what orders he had for me,
saying jokingly, by way of making him smile, that I was his little
housekeeper, and that I should be very punctual and exact in fulfilling
whatever commissions he gave me, in order to remain in his employ. So
then he, trying to smile in his turn, asked me to bring him one of
Walter Scott's romances, which he had formerly read to me while I
worked,--that romance was called 'Ivan--' 'Ivanhoe,' that's it. I was so
much amused with this book that Germain read it twice over to me. Poor
Germain! How very, very kind and attentive he was!"

"I suppose he wished to keep it as a reminiscence of bygone days?"

"No doubt of it; for he bade me go to the library from whence we had had
it, and to purchase the very same volumes that had so much entertained
us, and which we had read together,--not merely to hire them,--yes,
positively to buy them out and out; and you may imagine that was
something of a sacrifice for him, for he is no richer than you or I."

"He must have a noble and excellent heart to have thought of it," said
the Goualeuse, deeply touched.

"I declare you are as much affected by it as I was, my dear, kind
Goualeuse! But then, you see, the more I felt ready to cry, the more I
tried to laugh; for, to shed tears twice during a visit, intended to be
so very cheering and enlivening as mine was, was rather too bad. So, to
drive all those thoughts out of my head, I began to remind him of the
amusing story of a Jew,--a person we read about in the romance I was
telling you of. But the more I rattled away, and the greater nonsense I
tried to talk, the faster the large round tears gathered in his eyes,
and he kept looking at me with such an expression of misery as quite
broke my heart. And so--and so--at last my voice quite failed me, and I
could do nothing but mingle my sobs with his. He had not regained his
composure when I left him, and I felt quite provoked with myself for my
folly. 'If that is the way,' said I,'that I comfort and cheer up poor
Germain, I think I had better stay away!' Really, when I remember all
the fine things I intended to have said and done, by way of keeping up
his spirits, I feel quite spiteful towards myself for having so
completely failed."

At the name of Germain, another victim of the notary's unprincipled
persecution, Madame Séraphin redoubled her before close attention.

"And what has this poor young man done to deserve being put in prison?"
inquired Fleur-de-Marie.

"What has he done?" exclaimed Rigolette, whose grief became swallowed up
in indignation; "why, he has had the misfortune to fall into the hands
of a wicked old notary,--the same as persecutes poor Louise."

"Of her whom you have come to see?"

"To be sure; she lived as servant with this notary, and Germain was also
with him as cashier. It is too long a story to tell you now, how or of
what he unjustly accuses the poor fellow; but one thing is quite
certain, and that is, that the wretch of a notary pursues these two
unfortunate beings, who have never done him the least harm, with the
most determined malice and hatred. However, never mind,--a little
patience, 'every one in their turn,'--that's all." Rigolette uttered
these last words with a peculiarity of manner and expression that
created considerable uneasiness in the mind of Madame Séraphin. Instead,
therefore, of preserving the distance she had hitherto observed, she at
once joined in the conversation, saying to Fleur-de-Marie, with a kind
and maternal air:

"My dear girl, it is really growing too late for us to wait any
longer,--we must go; we are waited for, I assure you, with much anxiety.
I am sorry to hurry you away, because I can well imagine how much you
must be interested in what your friend is relating; for even I, who know
nothing of the two young persons she refers to, cannot help feeling my
very heart ache for their undeserved sufferings. Is it possible there
can be people in the world as wicked as the notary you were mentioning?
Pray, my dear mademoiselle, what may be the name of this bad man,--if I
may make so bold as to ask?"

Although Rigolette entertained not the slightest suspicion of the
sincerity of Madame Séraphin's affected sympathy, yet, recollecting how
strictly Rodolph had enjoined her to observe the utmost secrecy
respecting the protection he bestowed on both Germain and Louise, she
regretted having been led away by her affectionate zeal for her friends
to use such words,--"Patience; every one has his turn!"

"His name, madame, is Ferrand,--M. Jacques Ferrand, Notary," replied
Rigolette, skilfully adding, by way of compensation for her indiscreet
warmth, "and it is the more wicked and shameful of him to torment Louise
and Germain as he does, because the poor things have not a friend upon
earth but myself, and, God knows, it is little I can do besides wishing
them well out of their troubles!"

"Dear me,--poor things!" observed Madame Séraphin. "Well, I'm sure I
hoped it was otherwise when I heard you say, 'Patience; every one has
their turn!' I supposed you reckoned for certain upon some powerful
protector to defend these people against that dreadful notary."

"Alas, no, madame!" answered Rigolette, hoping to destroy any suspicion
Madame Séraphin might still harbour; "such, I am sorry to say, is not
the case. For who would be generous and disinterested enough to take the
part of two poor creatures like my unfortunate friends against a rich
and powerful man like M. Ferrand?"

"Oh, there are many good and noble-minded persons capable of performing
so good an action," pursued Fleur-de-Marie, after a moment's
consideration, and with ill-restrained excitement; "I myself know one to
whom it is equally a duty and a pleasure to succour and assist all who
are in need or difficulty,--one who is beloved and valued by all good
persons, as he is dreaded and hated by the bad."

Rigolette gazed on the Goualeuse with deep astonishment, and was just on
the point of asserting that she, too (alluding to Rodolph), knew some
one capable of courageously espousing the cause of the weak against the
strong; but, faithful to the injunctions of her neighbour (as she styled
the prince), she contented herself with merely saying, "Really, do you
indeed know anybody capable of generously coming forward in defence of
poor oppressed individuals, such as we have been talking of?"

"Indeed, I do. And, although I have already to solicit his goodness in
favour of others also in severe trouble, yet, I am quite sure that, did
he but know of the undeserved misfortunes of Louise and Germain, he
would both rescue them from misery and punish their wicked persecutor;
for his goodness and justice are inexhaustible."

Madame Séraphin surveyed her victim with surprise. "This girl," said
she, mentally, "might be even more dangerous than we thought for. And,
even if I had been weak enough to feel inclined to pity her, what I have
just heard would have rendered the little 'accident,' which is to rid us
of her, quite inevitable."

"Then, dear Goualeuse, since you have so valuable an acquaintance, I
beseech of you to recommend poor Louise and Germain to his notice," said
Rigolette, wisely considering that her two protégées would be all the
better for obtaining two protectors instead of one. "And pray say that
they do not in the least deserve their present wretched fate."

"Make yourself perfectly easy," returned Fleur-de-Marie; "I promise to
try to interest M. Rodolph in favour of your poor friends."

"Who did you say?" exclaimed Rigolette, "M. Rodolph?"

"Yes," replied La Goualeuse; "do you know him?"

"M. Rodolph?" again repeated Rigolette, perfectly bewildered; "is he a
travelling clerk?"

"I really don't know what he is. But why are you so much astonished?"

"Because I know a M. Rodolph!"

"Perhaps it is not the same."

"Well, describe yours. What is he like?"

"In the first place, he is young."

"So is mine."

"With a countenance full of nobleness and goodness."

"Precisely," exclaimed Rigolette, whose amazement increased. "Oh, it
must be the very man! Is your M. Rodolph rather dark-complexioned, with
a small moustache?"

"Yes, yes."

"Is he tall and thin, with a beautiful figure, and quite a fashionable,
gentlemanly sort of air,--wonderfully so, considering he is but a clerk?
Now, then, does your M. Rodolph answer to that description?"

"Perfectly," answered Fleur-de-Marie; "and I feel quite sure that we
both mean the same. The only thing that puzzles me is your fancying he
is a clerk."

"Oh, but I know he is. He told me so himself."

"And you know him intimately?"

"Why, he is my next-door neighbour."

"M. Rodolph is?"

"I mean next-room neighbour; because he occupies an apartment on the
fourth floor, next to mine."

"He--M. Rodolph--lodges in the next room to you?"

"Why, yes. But what do you find so astonishing in a thing as simple as
that? He only earns about fifteen or eighteen hundred francs a year,
and, of course, he could not afford a more expensive lodging,--though,
certainly, he does not strike me as being a very careful or economical
person; for, bless his dear heart, he actually does not know the price
of the clothes he wears."

"No, no, it cannot be the same M. Rodolph I am acquainted with," said
Fleur-de-Marie, reflecting seriously; "oh, no, quite impossible!"

"I suppose yours is a pattern of order and exactness?"

"He of whom I spoke, I must tell you, Rigolette," said Fleur-de-Marie,
with enthusiasm, "is all-powerful; his name is never pronounced but with
love and veneration; there is something awe-inspiring in his very
aspect, giving one the desire to kneel in his presence and offer humble
respect to his goodness and greatness."

"Ah, then, it is no use trying the comparison any further, my dear
Goualeuse; for my M. Rodolph is neither powerful, great, nor imposing.
He is very good-natured and merry, and all that; but oh, bless you, as
for being a person one would be likely to go on one's knees to, why, he
is quite the reverse. He cares no more for ceremony than I do, and even
promised me to come and help me clean my apartment and polish the floor.
And then, instead of being awe-inspiring, he settled with me to take me
out of a Sunday anywhere I liked to go. So that, you see, he can't be a
very great person. But, bless you, what am I thinking of? It seems as if
my heart were wholly engrossed by my Sunday pleasures, instead of
recollecting these poor creatures shut up and deprived of their liberty
in a prison. Ah, poor dear Louise--and poor Germain, too! Until they are
restored to freedom there is no happiness for me!"

For several minutes Fleur-de-Marie remained plunged in a deep reverie;
she all at once recalled to her remembrance that, at her first interview
with Rodolph, at the house of the ogress, his language and manners
resembled those of the usual frequenters of the _tapis-franc_. Was it
not, then, possible that he might be playing the part of the travelling
clerk, for the sake of some scheme he had in view? The difficulty
consisted in finding any probable cause for such a transformation. The
grisette, who quickly perceived the thoughtful meditation in which
Fleur-de-Marie was lost, said, kindly:

"Never mind puzzling your poor brains on the subject, my dear Goualeuse;
we shall soon find out whether we both know the same M. Rodolph. When
you see yours, speak of me to him; when I see mine, I will mention you;
by these means we shall easily discover what conclusion to come to."

"Where do you live, Rigolette?"

"No. 17 Rue du Temple."

"Come!" said Madame Séraphin (who had attentively listened to all this
conversation) to herself, "that is not a bad thing to know. This
all-powerful and mysterious personage, M. Rodolph, who is, no doubt,
passing himself off for a travelling clerk, occupies an apartment
adjoining that of this young mantua-maker, who appears to me to know
much more than she chooses to own to; and this defender of the
oppressed, it seems, is lodging in the same house with Morel and
Bradamanti. Well, well, if the grisette and the travelling clerk
continue to meddle with what does not concern them, I shall know where
to lay my hand upon them."

"As soon as ever I have spoken with M. Rodolph," said the Goualeuse, "I
will write to you, and give you my address where to send your answer;
but tell me yours over again, I am afraid of forgetting it."

"Oh, dear, how fortunate! I declare I have got one of my cards with me!
I remember a person I work for asked me to leave her one, to give a
friend who wished to employ me. So I brought it out for that purpose;
but I will give it to you, and carry her one another time." And here
Rigolette handed to Fleur-de-Marie a small card, on which was written,
in beautiful text-hand, "Mademoiselle Rigolette, Dressmaker, 17 Rue du
Temple." "There's a beauty!" continued the grisette. "Oh, isn't it
nicely done? Better, a good deal, than printing! Ah, poor dear Germain
wrote me a number of cards long ago! Oh, he was so kind, so attentive! I
don't know how it could have happened that I never found out half his
good qualities till he became unfortunate; and now I continually
reproach myself with having learned to love him so late."

"You love Germain, then?"

"Oh, yes, that I do! Why, you know, I must have some pretext for
visiting him in prison. Am I not an odd sort of girl?" said Rigolette,
choking a rising sigh, and smiling, like an April shower, amid the tears
which glittered in her large dark eyes.

"You are good and generous-hearted, as you ever were!" said
Fleur-de-Marie, tenderly pressing her friend's hands within her own.

Madame Séraphin had evidently learned all she cared to know, and feeling
very little interest in any further disclosure of Rigolette's love for
young Germain, hastily approaching Fleur-de-Marie, she abruptly said:

"Come, my dear child, do not keep me waiting another minute, I beg; it
is very late, and I shall be scolded, as it is, for being so much behind
my time; we have trifled away a good quarter of an hour, and must
endeavour to make up for it."

"What a nasty cross old body that is!" said Rigolette, in a whisper, to
Fleur-de-Marie. "I don't like the looks of her at all!" Then, speaking
in a louder voice, she added, "Whenever you come to Paris, my dear
Goualeuse, be sure to come and see me. I should be so delighted to have
you all to myself for a whole day, to show you my little home and my
birds; for I have got some, such sweet pretty ones! Oh, that is my chief
indulgence and expense!"

"I will try to come and see you, but certainly I will write you. So
good-bye, my dear, dear Rigolette! Adieu! Oh, if you only knew how happy
I feel at having met with you again!"

"And, I am sure, so do I; but I trust we shall soon see each other
again; and, besides, I am so impatient to know whether your M. Rodolph
is the same as mine. Pray write to me very soon upon this subject, will
you? Promise you will!"

"Indeed I will! Adieu, dear Rigolette!"

"Farewell, my very dear Goualeuse!"

And again the two poor girls, each striving to conceal their distress at
parting, indulged in a long and affectionate embrace. Rigolette then
turned away, to enter the prison for the purpose of visiting Louise,
according to the kind permission obtained for her by Rodolph, while
Fleur-de-Marie, with Madame Séraphin, got into the coach which was
waiting for them. The coachman was instructed to proceed to Batignolles,
and to stop at the barrier. A cross-road of inconsiderable length
conducted from this spot almost directly to the borders of the Seine,
not far from the Isle du Ravageur. Wholly unacquainted with the locality
of Paris, Fleur-de-Marie was unable to detect that the vehicle did not
take the road to the Barrier St. Denis; it was only when the coach
stopped at Batignolles, and she was requested by Madame Séraphin to
alight, that she said:

"It seems to me, madame, that we are not in the road to Bouqueval; and
how shall we be able to walk from hence to the farm?"

"All that I can tell you, my dear child," answered the _femme de
charge_, kindly, "is, that I am obeying their orders given me by your
benefactors, and that you will pain them greatly if you keep your
friends waiting."

"Oh, not for worlds would I be so presuming and ungrateful as to oppose
their slightest wish!" exclaimed poor Fleur-de-Marie, with kindling
warmth, "and I beseech you, madame, to pardon my seeming hesitation;
but, since you plead the commands of my revered protectors, depend upon
my following you blindly and silently whithersoever you are pleased to
take me. Only tell me, is Madame Georges quite well?"

"Oh, in most excellent health and spirits!"

"And M. Rodolph?"

"Perfectly well, also."

"Then you know him? But, madame, when I was speaking to Rigolette
concerning him just now, you did not seem to be acquainted with him; at
least, you did not say so."

"Because, in pursuance with the directions given me, I affected to be
ignorant of the person you alluded to."

"And did M. Rodolph, himself, give you those orders?"

"Why, what a dear, curious little thing this is!" said the _femme de
charge_, smilingly; "I must mind what I am about, or, with her innocent
ways of putting questions, she will find out all my secrets!"

"Indeed, madame, I am ashamed of seeming so inquisitive, but if you
could only imagine how my heart beats with joy at the bare thoughts of
seeing my beloved friends again, you would pardon me; but, as we have
only to walk on to the place whither you are taking me, I shall soon be
able to gratify my wishes, without tormenting you by further inquiries."

"To be sure you will, my dear, for I promise you that in a quarter of an
hour we shall have reached the end of our journey."

The _femme de charge_, having now left behind the last houses in the
village of Batignolles, conducted Fleur-de-Marie across a grassy road,
bordered on each side by lofty walnut-trees. The day was warm and fine,
the sky half covered by the rich purple clouds of the setting sun, which
now cast its declining rays on the heights of the _colombes_, situated
on the other side of the Seine. As Fleur-de-Marie approached the banks
of the river, a delicate bloom tinged her pale cheeks, and she seemed to
breathe with delight the pure fresh air that blew from the country.
Indeed, so strongly was the look of happiness imprinted on her
countenance, that even Madame Séraphin could not avoid noticing it.

"You seem full of joy, my dear child; I declare it is quite a pleasure
to see you."

"Oh, yes, indeed, I am overflowing with gratitude and eagerness at the
thoughts of seeing my dear Madame Georges so soon, and perhaps, too, M.
Rodolph! I trust I may, for, besides my own happiness at beholding him,
I want to speak to him in favour of several poor unfortunate persons I
should be so glad to recommend to his kindness and protection. How,
then, can I be sad when I have so many delightful things to look forward
to? Oh, who could be unhappy, with such a prospect as mine? And see,
too, how gay and beautiful the sky is, all covered with bright, golden
clouds! And the dear soft green grass,--I think it seems greener than
ever, spite of the season. And look--look out there! See, where the
river flows behind those willow-trees! Oh, how wide and sparkling it
seems; and, when the sun shines on it, it almost dazzles my eyes to gaze
on it! It seems like a sheet of gold. Ah, I saw it shining in the same
way in the basin of the prison a little while ago! God does not forget
even the poor prisoners, but allows them to have a sight of his wondrous
works. Though they are separated by high stone walls from their fellow
creatures, the glorious sun shows them his golden face, and sparkles and
glitters upon the water there, the same as in the gardens of a king!"
added Fleur-de-Marie, with pious gratitude. Then, incited by a reference
to her captivity still more to appreciate the charms of liberty, she
exclaimed, with a burst of innocent delight: "Oh, pray, madame, do look
there, just in the middle of the river, at that pretty little island,
bordered with willows and poplars, and that sweet little white house,
almost close to the water's edge! How delicious it must be to live there
in the summer, when all the leaves are on the trees and the birds sing
so sweetly among the branches! Oh, how quiet and cool it must be in that
nice place!"

"Well, really, now, my dear," said Madame Séraphin, with a grim smile,
"it is singular enough your being so much struck with that little isle!"

"Why, madame?"

"Because it is there we are actually going to."

"Going to that island?"

"Yes; does that astonish you?"

"Rather so, madame."

"But suppose you found your friends there?"

"Oh, what do you mean?"

"Suppose, I say, you found all your friends had assembled there, to
welcome you on your release from prison, should you not then be greatly
surprised?"

"Oh, if it were but possible! My dear Madame Georges?--M. Rodolph?"

"Upon my word, my dear, I am just like a baby in your hands, and you
turn and twist me just as you please; it is useless for me to try to
conceal anything, for, with your little winning ways, you find out all
secrets."

"Then I shall soon see them again? Dear madame, how can I ever thank you
sufficiently for your goodness to a poor girl like me? Feel how my heart
beats! It is all with joy and happiness!"

"Well, well, my love, be as wild with delight as you please, but pray do
not hurry on so very fast. You forget, you little mad thing, that my old
bones cannot run as fast as your nimble young feet."

"I beg your pardon, madame; but I cannot help being quite impatient to
arrive where we are going."

"To be sure you cannot; don't fancy I mean to blame you for it; quite
the contrary."

"The road slopes a little now, madame, and it is rather rough, too; will
you accept of my arm to assist you down?"

"I never refuse a good offer, my dear; for I am somewhat infirm, as well
as old, while you are young and active."

"Then pray lean all your weight on me, madame; don't be afraid of tiring
me."

"Many thanks, my child! Your help was really very serviceable, for the
descent is so extremely rapid just here. Now, then, we are once more on
smooth, level ground."

"Oh, madame, can it, indeed, be true that I am about to meet my dear
Madame Georges? I can scarcely persuade myself it is reality."

"A little patience,--another quarter of an hour, and then you will see
whether it is true or false."

"But what puzzles me," said Fleur-de-Marie, after a moment's reflection,
"is, why Madame Georges should have thought proper to meet me here,
instead of at the farm."

"Still curious, my dear child, still wanting to know everybody's
reasons."

"How very foolish and unreasonable I am, am I not, madame?" said
Fleur-de-Marie, smiling.

"And, by way of punishing you, I have a great mind to tell you what the
surprise is that your friends have prepared for you."

"For me, madame, a surprise?"

"Be quiet, you little chatterbox! You will make me reveal the secret, in
spite of myself."

We shall now leave Madame Séraphin and her victim proceeding along the
road which led to the river's side, while we precede them, by a few
minutes, to the Isle du Ravageur.




CHAPTER XV.

THE BOATS.


During the night the appearance of the isle inhabited by the Martial
family was very gloomy, but by the bright light of day nothing could be
more smiling than this accursed spot. Bordered by willows and poplars,
almost entirely covered with thick grass, in which wound several paths
of yellow sand, the islet included a kitchen-garden and a good number of
fruit-trees. In the midst of the orchard was to be seen the hovel, with
the thatched roof, into which Martial had expressed his intention to
retire with François and Amandine. On this side, the isle terminated at
its point by a kind of stockade, formed of large piles, driven in to
prevent the soil from wearing away.

In front of the house, and almost touching the landing-place, was a
small arbour of green trellis-work, intended to support in summer-time
the creeping shoots of the young vines and hops,--a cradle of verdure,
beneath which were arranged tables for the visitors. At one end of the
house, painted white and covered with tiles, a wood-house, with a loft
over it, formed at the angle a small wing, much lower than the main body
of the building. Almost precisely over this wing there appeared a
window, with the shutters covered with iron plates, and strengthened
without by two transverse iron bars attached to the wall by strong
clamps.

Three boats were undulating in the water, fastened to posts at the
landing-place. Seated in one of these boats, Nicholas was making sure
that the valve he had introduced performed its part properly. Standing
on a bench at the mouth of the arbour, Calabash, with her hands placed
over her eyes so as to shade away the sun, was looking out in the
direction in which Madame Séraphin and Fleur-de-Marie were to come to
reach the isle.

"I don't see any one yet, old or young," said Calabash, getting off the
bench and speaking to Nicholas. "It will be just as it was yesterday; we
may as well wait for the King of Prussia. If these women do not come in
half an hour, we can't wait any longer; Bras-Rouge's 'dodge' is much
better, and he'll be waiting for us. The diamond-matcher is to be at his
place in the Champs Elysées at five o'clock. We ought to be there before
her; the Chouette said so this morning."

"You are right," replied Nicholas, leaving the boat. "May thunder smite
the old devil's kin, who has given us all the trouble for nothing! The
valve works capitally. It appears we shall only have one instead of two
jobs."

"Besides, Bras-Rouge and Barbillon will want us; they can do nothing by
their two selves."

"True, again; for, whilst the job is doing, Bras-Rouge must keep watch
outside the cabaret, and Barbillon is not strong enough to drag the
matcher into the cellar, for the old ---- will fight for it, I know!"

"Didn't the Chouette say that, for a joke, she had got the Schoolmaster
at 'school' in the cellar?"

"Not in this one; in another much deeper, and which is filled with water
at spring-tides."

"How the Schoolmaster must rage and foam there in the cellar! There all
alone, and blind, too!"

"That is no matter, for, if he saw as clear as ever, he could see
nothing there; the cellar is as dark as an oven."

"Still, when he has done singing all the songs he knows, to pass away
the time, his days must hang precious heavy on his hands."

"The Chouette says that he amuses himself with rat-hunting, and that the
cellar is full of game."

"I say, Nicholas, talking of certain persons who must be tired, and
fume, and fret," remarked Calabash, with a savage smile, and pointing to
the window fastened up with the iron plates, "there is one there who
must be ready to devour his own flesh and blood."

"Bah! He's asleep. Since the morning he hasn't stirred, and his dog is
silent."

"Perhaps he has strangled him for food. For two days, they must both be
desperate hungry and thirsty up there together."

"That is their affair. Martial may still last a long time in this way,
if it amuses him. When it is done, why, we shall say he died of his
complaint, and there'll be an end of that affair."

"Do you think so?"

"Of course I do. As mother went to Asnières this morning, she met Père
Férot, the fisherman, and, as he was very much astonished at not having
seen his friend Martial for the last two days, mother told him that
Martial was confined to his bed, and was so ill that his life was
despaired of. Daddy Férot swallowed all, like so much honey; he'll tell
everybody else, and when the thing's done and over, why, it'll all seem
nat'ral enough."

"Yes, but he won't die directly; this way is a tedious one."

"What else is to be done? There was no way of doing otherwise. That
devil of a Martial, when he's put up, is as full of mischief as the old
one himself, and as strong as a bull; particularly when he suspects
anything, it is dangerous to approach him; but, now his door is well
nailed up on the outside, what can he do? His window is strongly
fastened with iron, too."

"Why, he might have driven out the bars by cutting away the plaster with
his knife, and he would have done it, only I got up the ladder, and
chopped at his fingers with the bill-hook every time he tried to go to
work."

"What a pleasant watch!" said the ruffian, with a chuckle; "it must have
been vastly amusing!"

"Why, it was to give you time to come with the iron plates you went to
get from Père Micou."

"What a rage the dear brother must have been in!"

"He ground his teeth like a lunatic. Two or three times he tried to
drive me away from the iron bars with his stick, but then, as he had
only one hand at liberty, he could not work and release the iron bars,
which was what he was trying at."

"Fortunately, there's no fireplace in his room, and the door is solid,
and his hands finely cut; if not, he would work his way through the
floor."

"What! Through those heavy beams? No, no, there's no chance of his
escaping; the shutters are covered with iron plates and strengthened
with two bars of iron, the door is nailed up outside with large
boat-nails three inches long. His coffin is more solid than if it were
made of oak and lead."

"I say, though, when La Louve comes out of prison, and makes her way
here, to see her man, as she calls him?"

"Well, we shall say, 'Look for him.'"

"By the way, do you know that, if mother had not shut up those young
'rips' of children, they would have gnawed their ways through the door,
like young rats, to free Martial? That little vagabond François is quite
furious since he suspects we have packed away his tall brother."

"But, you know, they mustn't be left in the room up-stairs whilst we
leave the island; the window is not barred, and they have only to drop
down outside."

At this moment the attention of Nicholas and Calabash was attracted by
the sound of cries and sobs which came from the house. They saw the door
of the ground floor, which had been open until then, close violently,
and a minute afterwards the pale and sinister countenance of Mère
Martial appeared through the bars of the kitchen window. With her long
lean arm the culprit's widow made a sign to her children to come to her.

"There's a row, I know; I'll bet that it is François, who's giving
himself some airs again," said Nicholas. "That beggar Martial! But for
him, this young scamp would be by himself. You keep a good look-out,
and, if you see the two women coming, give me a call."

Whilst Calabash again mounted the bench, and looked out for the arrival
of Séraphin and the Goualeuse, Nicholas entered the house. Little
Amandine was on her knees in the centre of the kitchen, sobbing and
asking pardon for her Brother François. Enraged and threatened, the lad,
ensconced in one of the angles of the apartment, had Nicholas's hatchet
in his hand, and appeared determined this time to offer the most
desperate resistance to his mother's wishes. Impassive as usual, showing
Nicholas the cellar, the widow made a sign to her son to shut François
up there.

"I will never be shut up there!" cried the boy, in a determined tone.
"You want to make us die of hunger, like Brother Martial."

The widow looked at Nicholas with an impatient air, as if to reproach
him for not instantly executing her commands, as, with another imperious
gesture, she pointed to François. Seeing his brother advance towards
him, the young boy brandished the axe with a desperate air and cried:

"If you try to shut me up there, whether it is mother, brother, or
Calabash, so much the worse. I shall strike, and the hatchet cuts."

Nicholas felt as the widow did the pressing necessity there was to
prevent the two children from going to Martial's succour whilst the
house was left to itself, as well as to put them out of the way of
seeing the scenes which were about to pass, for their window looked onto
the river in which they were about to drown Fleur-de-Marie. But Nicholas
was as cowardly as he was ferocious, and, afraid of receiving a blow
from the dangerous hatchet with which his young brother was armed,
hesitated to approach him. The widow, angry at his hesitation, pushed
him towards François; but Nicholas, again retreating, exclaimed:

"But, mother, if he cuts me? You know I want all my arms and fingers at
this time, and I feel still the thump that brute Martial gave me."

The widow shrugged her shoulders, and advanced towards François.

"Don't come near me, mother," shrieked the boy in a fury, "or you'll pay
dear for all the beatings you have given me and Amandine!"

"Let 'em shut us up; don't strike mother!" cried Amandine, in fear.

At this moment Nicholas saw upon a chair a large blanket which he used
to wrap his booty in at times, and, taking hold of and partly unfolding
it, he threw it completely over François's head, who, in spite of his
efforts, finding himself entangled under its folds, could not make use
of his weapon. Nicholas then seized hold of him, and, with his mother's
help, carried him into the cellar. Amandine had continued kneeling in
the centre of the kitchen, and, as soon as she saw her brother overcome,
she sprang up and, in spite of her fright, went to join him in the dark
hole. The door was then double-locked on the brother and sister.

"It will still be that infernal Martial's fault, if these children
behave in this outrageous manner to us," said Nicholas.

"Nothing has been heard in his room since this morning," said the
widow, with a pensive air, and she shuddered, "nothing!"

"That's a sign, mother, that you were right to say to Père Férot, the
fisherman at Asnières, that Martial had been so dangerously ill as to be
confined to his bed for the last two days; for now, when all is known,
it will not astonish anybody."

After a moment's silence, as and if she wished to escape a painful
thought, the widow replied, suddenly:

"Didn't the Chouette come here whilst I was at Asnières?"

"Yes, mother."

"Why didn't she stay and accompany us to Bras-Rouge's? I mistrust her."

"Bah! You mistrust everybody, mother; you are always fancying they are
going to play you some trick. To-day it is the Chouette, yesterday it
was Bras-Rouge."

"Bras-Rouge is at liberty,--my son is at Toulon, yet they committed the
same robbery."

"You are always saying this. Bras-Rouge escaped because he is as cunning
as a fox--that's it; the Chouette did not stay, because she had an
appointment at two o'clock, near the Observatory, with the tall man in
black, at whose desire she has carried off this young country girl, by
the help of the Schoolmaster and Tortillard; and Barbillon drove the
hackney-coach which the tall man in black had hired for the job. So how,
mother, do you suppose the Chouette would inform against us, when she
tells us the 'jobs' she has in hand, and we do not tell her ours? for
she knows nothing of this drowning job that is to come off directly. Be
easy, mother; wolves don't eat each other, and this will be a good day's
work; and when I recollect, too, that the jewel-matcher has often about
her twenty to thirty thousand francs' worth of diamonds in her bag, and
that, in less than two hours, we shall have her in Bras-Rouge's cellar!
Thirty thousand francs' worth of diamonds, mother! Think of that!"

"And, whilst we lay hands on this woman, Bras-Rouge is to remain outside
the cabaret?" inquired the widow, with an air of suspicion.

"Well, and where would you have him, I should like to know? If any one
comes to his house, mustn't he be outside the door to answer them, and
prevent them from entering the place whilst we are doing our 'job?'"

"Nicholas! Nicholas!" cried Calabash, at this moment from outside, "here
come the two women!"

"Quick, quick, mother! Your shawl! I will land you on the other side,
and that will be so much done," said Nicholas.

The widow had replaced her mourning head-dress with a high black cap, in
which she now made her appearance. At the instigation of Nicholas, she
wrapped herself in a large plaid shawl, with gray and white checks; and,
after having carefully closed and secured the kitchen door, she placed
the key behind one of the window-shutters on the ground-floor, and
followed her son, who was hastily pursuing his way to the landing-place.
Almost involuntarily, as she quitted the island, she cast a long and
meditative look at Martial's window; and the train of thought to which
its firmly nailed and iron-bound exterior gave rise seemed, to judge by
their effect, to be of a very mingled and complicated character, for she
knitted her brows, pursed her lips, and then, after a sudden convulsive
shudder, she murmured, in a low hesitating voice:

"It is his own fault--it is his own fault!"

"Nicholas, do you see them? Just down there, along the path,--a country
girl and an old woman!" exclaimed Calabash, pointing to the other side
of the river, where Madame Séraphin and Fleur-de-Marie were descending a
narrow, winding path which passed by a high bank, on the top of which
were the lime-kilns.

"Let us wait for the signal; don't let us spoil the job by too much
haste," said Nicholas.

"What! Are you blind? Don't you recognise the stout woman who came the
day before yesterday? Look at her orange shawl; and the little country
girl, what a hurry she seems in! She's a good little thing, I know; and
it's plain she has no idea of what is going to happen to her, or she
wouldn't hasten on at that pace, I'm thinking."

"Yes, I recollect the stout woman now. It's all right, then--all right!
Although they are so much behind the time I had almost given up the job
as bad. But let us quite understand the thing, Calabash. I shall take
the old woman and the young girl in the boat with a valve to it; you
will follow me close on, stern to stern; and mind and row steadily, so
that, with one spring, I may jump from one boat to the other, as soon as
I have opened the pipe and the water begins to sink the boat."

"Don't be afraid about me, it is not the first time I've pulled a boat,
is it?"

"I am not afraid of being drowned, you know I can swim; but, if I did
not jump well into the other boat, why, the women, in their struggles
against drowning, might catch hold of me and--much obliged to you, but I
have no fancy for a bath with the two ladies."

"The old woman waves her handkerchief," said Calabash; "there they are
on the bank."

"Come, come along, mother, let's push off," said Nicholas, unmooring.
"Come you into the boat with the valve, then the two women will not have
any fear; and you, Calabash, jump into t'other, and use your arms, my
girl, and pull a good one. Ah, by the way, take the boat-hook and put it
beside you, it is as sharp as a lance, and it may be useful," added the
ruffian, as he placed beside Calabash in the boat a long hook with a
sharp iron point.

A few moments, and the two boats, one rowed by Nicholas and the other
by Calabash, reached the shore where, for some moments, Madame Séraphin
and Fleur-de-Marie had been waiting. Whilst Nicholas was fastening his
boat to a post on the bank, Madame Séraphin approached him, and said, in
a low and rapid tone:

"Say that Madame Georges is waiting for us at the island,--you
understand?" And then, in a louder voice, she added, "We are rather
late, my lad."

"Yes, my good lady, Madame Georges has been asking for you several
times."

"You see, my dear young lady, Madame Georges is waiting for us," said
Madame Séraphin, turning to Fleur-de-Marie, who, in spite of her
confidence, had felt considerable repugnance at the sight of the
sinister countenances of Calabash, Nicholas, and the widow; but the
mention of Madame Georges reassured her, and she replied:

"I am just as impatient to see Madame Georges; fortunately, it is not a
long way across."

"How delighted the dear lady will be!" said Madame Séraphin. Then,
addressing Nicholas, "Now, then, my lad, bring your boat a little closer
that we may get in." Adding, in an undertone, "The girl must be drowned,
mind; if she comes up thrust her back again into the water."

"All right, ma'am; and don't be alarmed yourself, but, when I make you
the signal, give me your hand, she'll then pass under all alone, for
everything's ready, and you have nothing to fear," replied Nicholas, in
a similar tone; and then, with savage brutality, unmoved by
Fleur-de-Marie's youth and beauty, he put his hand out to her. The young
girl leaned lightly on him and entered the boat.

"Now you, my good lady," said Nicholas to Madame Séraphin, offering her
his hand in turn.

Was it presentiment, or mistrust, or only fear that she could not spring
quickly enough out of the little bark in which Nicholas and the
Goualeuse were, that made Jacques Ferrand's housekeeper say to Nicholas,
shrinking back, "No, I'll go in the boat with mademoiselle?" And she
took her seat by Calabash.

"Just as you please," said Nicholas, exchanging an expressive look with
his sister as, with a vigorous thrust with his oar, he drove his boat
from the bank.

His sister did the same directly Madame Séraphin was seated beside her.
Standing, looking fixedly on the bank, indifferent to the scene, the
widow, pensive and absorbed, fixed her look obstinately on Martial's
window, which was discernible from the landing-place through the
poplars. During this time the two boats, in the first of which were
Nicholas and Fleur-de-Marie and in the other Calabash and Madame
Séraphin, left the bank slowly.




CHAPTER XVI.

THE HAPPINESS OF MEETING.


Before the reader is made acquainted with the _dénouement_ of the drama
then passing in Nicholas's boat, we shall beg leave to retrace our
steps.

Shortly after Fleur-de-Marie had quitted St. Lazare in company of Madame
Séraphin, La Louve also left that prison. Thanks to the recommendations
of Madame Armand and the governor, who were desirous of recompensing her
for her kindness towards Mont Saint-Jean, the few remaining days the
beloved of Martial had still to remain in confinement were remitted her.
A complete change had come over this hitherto depraved, degraded, and
intractable being. Forever brooding over the description of the
peaceful, wild, and retired life, so beautifully depictured by
Fleur-de-Marie, La Louve entertained the utmost horror and disgust of
her past life. To bury herself with Martial in the deep shades of some
vast forest, such was her waking and dreaming thought,--the one fixed
idea of her existence, against which all her former evil inclinations
had in vain struggled when, separating herself from La Goualeuse, whose
growing influence she feared, this singular creature had retired to
another part of St. Lazare.

To complete this sincere though rapid conversion, still more assured by
the ineffectual resistance attempted by the perverse and froward habits
of her companion, Fleur-de-Marie, following the dictates of her own
natural good sense, had thus reasoned:

"La Louve, a violent and determined creature, is passionately fond of
Martial. She would, then, hail with delight the means of quitting the
disgraceful life she now, for the first time, views with shame and
disgust, for the purpose of entirely devoting herself to the rude,
unpolished man whose taste she so entirely partakes of, and who seeks to
hide himself from the world, as much from inclination as from a desire
of escaping from the universal reprobation in which his family is
viewed."

Assisted by these small materials, gleaned during her conversation with
La Louve, Fleur-de-Marie, in giving a right direction to the unbridled
passion and restraining the daring hardihood of the reckless creature,
had positively converted a lost, wretched being into an honest woman;
for what could the most virtuous of her sex have desired more than to
bestow her undivided affections on the man of her choice, to dwell with
him in the silence and solitude of woods, where hard labour, privations
and poverty, would all be cheerfully borne and shared for his dear sake,
to whom her heart was given?

And such was the constant, ardent prayer of La Louve. Relying on the
assistance which Fleur-de-Marie had assured her of in the name of an
unknown benefactor, La Louve determined to make her praiseworthy
proposal to her lover, not, indeed, without the keen and bitter
apprehension of being rejected by him, for La Goualeuse, while she
brought her to blush for her past life, awakened her to a just sense
also of her position as regarded Martial.

Once at liberty, La Louve thought only of seeing "her man," as she
called him. He took exclusive possession of her mind; she had heard
nothing of him for several days. In the hopes of meeting with him in the
Isle du Ravageur, and with the determination of waiting there until he
came, should she fail to find him at first, she paid the driver of a
cabriolet liberally to conduct her with all speed to the bridge of
Asnières, which she crossed about a quarter of an hour before Madame
Séraphin and Fleur-de-Marie (they having walked from the barrier) had
reached the banks of the river near the lime-kilns. As Martial did not
present himself to ferry La Louve across to the Isle du Ravageur, she
applied to an old fisherman, named Father Férot, who lived close by the
bridge.

It was about four o'clock in the day when a cabriolet stopped at the
entrance of a small street in the village of Asnières. La Louve leaped
from it at one bound, threw a five-franc piece to the driver, and
proceeded with all haste to the dwelling of old Férot, the ferryman. La
Louve, no longer dressed in her prison garb, wore a gown of dark green
merino, a red imitation of cashmere shawl with large, flaming pattern,
and a net cap trimmed with riband; her thick, curly hair was scarcely
smoothed out, her impatient longing to see Martial having rendered an
ordinary attention to her toilet quite impossible. Any other female
would, after so long a separation, have exerted her very utmost to
appear becomingly adorned at her first interview with her lover; but La
Louve knew little and cared less for all these coquettish arts, which
ill accorded with her excitable nature. Her first, her predominating
desire was to see "her man" as quickly as possible, and this impetuous
wish was caused, not alone by the fervour of a love which, in minds as
wild and unregulated as hers, sometimes leads on to madness, but also
from a yearning to pour into the ear of Martial the virtuous resolutions
she had formed, and to reveal to him the bright vista of happiness
opened to both by her conversation with Fleur-de-Marie.

The flying steps of La Louve soon conducted her to the fisherman's
cottage, and there, seated tranquilly before the door, she found Father
Férot, an old, white-headed man, busily employed mending his nets. Even
before she came close up to him, La Louve cried out:

"Quick, quick, Father Férot! Your boat! Your boat!"

"What! Is it you, my girl? Well, how are you? I have not seen you this
long while."

"I know, I know; but where is your boat? and take me across to the isle
as fast as you can row."

"My boat? Well to be sure! Now, how very unlucky! As if it was to be so.
Bless you, my girl, it is quite out of my power to ferry you across
to-day."

"But why? Why is it?"

"Why, you see, my son has taken my boat to go up to the boat-races held
at St. Ouen. Bless your heart, I don't think there's a boat left all
along the river's side."

"Distraction!" exclaimed La Louve, stamping her foot and clenching her
hand. "Then all is lost; I shall not be able to see him!"

"'Pon my honour and word, it's true, though," said old Férot. "I am
extremely sorry I am unable to ferry you over, because, no doubt, by
your going on so, he is very much worse."

"Who is much worse? Who?"

"Why, Martial!"

"Martial!" exclaimed La Louve, snatching the sleeve of old Férot's
jacket, "My man ill?"

"Bless me! Did you not know it?"

"Martial? Do you mean Martial?"

"To be sure I do; but don't hold me so tight, you'll tear my blouse. Now
be quiet, there's a good girl. I declare you frighten me, you stare
about so wildly."

"Ill! Martial ill? And how long has he been so?"

"Oh, two or three days."

"'Tis false! He would have written and told me of it, had it been so."

"Ah, but then, don't you see? He's been too bad to handle a pen."

"Too ill to write! And he is on the isle! Are you sure--quite sure he is
there?"

"Why, I'll tell you. You must know, this morning, I meets the widow
Martial. Now you are aware, my girl, that most, in general, when I
notice her coming one way, I make it my business to go the other, for I
am not particular fond of her,--I can't say I am. So then--"

"But my man--my man! Tell me of him!"

"Wait a bit,--I'm coming to him. So when I found I couldn't get away
from the mother, and, to speak the honest truth, that woman makes me
afraid to seem to slight her. She has a sort of an evil look about her,
like one as could do you any manner of harm for only wishing for; I
can't account for it, I don't know what it is, for I am not timorous by
nature, but somehow the widow Martial does downright scare me. Well,
says I, thinking just to say a few words and pass on, 'I haven't seen
anything of your son Martial these last two or three days,' says I, 'I
suppose he's not with you just now?' upon which she fixed her eyes upon
me with such a look! 'Tis well they were not pistols, or they would have
shot me, as folks say."

"You drive me wild! And then--and what said she?"

Father Férot was silent for a minute or two, and then added:

"Come, now, you are a right sort of a girl; if you will only promise me
to be secret, I will tell you all I know."

"Concerning my man?"

"Ay, to be sure, for Martial is a good fellow, though somewhat
thoughtless; and it would be a sore pity should any mischance befall him
through that old wretch of a mother or his rascally brother!"

"But what is going on? What have his mother or brother done? And where
is he, eh? Speak, I tell you! Speak!"

"Well, well, have a little patience! And, I say, do just let my blouse
alone! Come, take your hands off, there's a good girl; if you keep
interrupting me, and tear my clothes in this way, I shall never be able
to finish my story, and you will know nothing at last."

"Oh, how you try my patience!" exclaimed La Louve, stamping her foot
with intense passion.

"And you promise never to repeat a word of what I am about to tell you?"

"No, no, I never will!"

"Upon your word of honour?"

"Father Férot, you will drive me mad!"

"Oh, what a hot-headed girl it is! Well, now, then, this is what I have
got to say; but, first and foremost, I must tell you that Martial is
more than ever at variance with his family; and, if he were to get some
foul play at their hands, I should not be at all surprised; and that
makes me the more sorry my boat is not at hand to help you across the
water, for, if you reckon upon either Nicholas or Calabash taking you
over to the isle, why, you'll just find yourself disappointed, that's
all."

"I know that as well as you do; but what did my man's mother tell you?
He was in the isle, then, when he fell ill, was he not?"

"Don't you put me out so with your questions; let me tell my story my
own way. This morning I says to the widow,'Why,' says I,'I have seen
nothing of Martial these last two or three days. I mark his boat is
still moored,--he don't seem to use it as usual; I suppose he's gone
away a bit? Maybe he's in Paris upon his business?' Upon which the widow
gave me, oh, such a devil's look! So says she,'He's bad a-bed in the
isle, and we don't look for him to get better!' 'Oh, oh!' says I to
myself,'that's it, is it? It's three days since--' Holla! stop, I say!"
cried old Férot, interrupting himself; "where the deuce are you going?
What is the girl after now?"

Believing the life of Martial in danger from the inhabitants of the
isle, and unable longer to endure the twaddle of the old fisherman, La
Louve rushed, half frantic with rage and fear, towards the banks of the
Seine. Some topographical descriptions will be requisite for the perfect
understanding of the ensuing scene.

The Isle du Ravageur was nearer to the left bank of the river than it
was to the right, from which Fleur-de-Marie and Madame Séraphin had
embarked. La Louve stood on the left bank. Without being extremely high,
the surface of the isle completely prevented those on one side the river
from seeing what was passing on the opposite bank; thus La Louve had
been unable to witness the embarkation of La Goualeuse, while the
Martial family had been equally prevented from seeing La Louve, who, at
that very instant, was rushing in wild desperation along the banks of
the other side of the river.

Let us also recall to the reader, that the country-house belonging to
Doctor Griffon, and temporarily occupied by the Count Saint-Remy was
midway between the land and that part of the shore where La Louve
arrived half wild with apprehension and impatience. Unconsciously she
rushed past two individuals, who, struck with her excited manner and
haggard looks, turned back to watch her proceedings. These two
personages were the Count Saint-Remy and Doctor Griffon.

The first impulse of La Louve, upon learning the danger which threatened
her lover, was to hurry towards the spot from whence the peril
proceeded; but, as she reached the water's edge, she became painfully
sensible of the difficulties that stood in the way of her reaching the
opposite land. As the old fisherman had assured her, she well knew the
folly of expecting any strangers to pass by, and none of the Martial
family would take the trouble of rowing over to fetch her to the isle.

Heated and breathless, her eyes sparkling with eager excitement, she
stopped opposite that point of the isle which, taking a sudden bend in
this direction, was the nearest approach from the shore. Through the
leafless branches of the willows and poplars, La Louve could see the
roof of the very house where Martial perhaps lay dying.

At this distracting idea La Louve uttered a wild cry of desperation,
then, snatching off her shawl and cap, she slipped out of her gown; and,
undressed as she was to her petticoat, she threw herself intrepidly into
the river, waded until she got out of her depth, and then, fearlessly
striking out, she swam determinedly towards the isle, affording a
strange spectacle of wild and desperate energy. At each fresh impulsion
of the arms the long, thick hair of La Louve, unfastened by the violent
exercise she was using, shook and waved about her head like the rich
mane of a war-horse. But for the fixedness of her gaze, constantly
riveted on the house which contained Martial, and the contraction of her
features, drawn together by almost the convulsive agonies of fear and
dreadful anticipation of arriving too late, the poacher's mistress might
have been supposed to have been merely enjoying the cool refreshment of
the water for her own sport and diversion, so boldly and freely did she
swim.

Tattooed in remembrance of her lover, her white but sinewy arms, strong
as those of a man, divided the waters with a stroke which sent the
sparkling element in rushing streams of liquid pearls over her broad
shoulders and strong, expansive chest, resembling a block of
half-submerged marble. All at once, from the other side of the isle,
rose a cry of distress,--a cry of agony at once fearful and despairing.
La Louve started, and suddenly stopped in her rapid course; then
supporting herself with one hand, with the other she pushed back her
thick, dripping hair, and listened. Again the cry was repeated, but
more feebly, supplicatory, convulsive, and expiring; and then the most
profound silence reigned around.

"'Tis Martial--'tis his cry! He calls me to his aid!" exclaimed La
Louve, swimming with renewed vigour, for, in her excited state of mind,
the voice which had rent the air, and sent a pang through her whole
frame, seemed to her to be that of her lover.

The count and the doctor, whom La Louve had rushed so quickly by, were
quite unable to overtake her in time to prevent her daring attempt; but
both arrived immediately opposite the isle at the moment when those
frightful cries were heard. Both stopped, as perfectly shocked and
startled as La Louve had been. Observing the desperate energy with which
she battled with the water, they exclaimed:

"The unfortunate creature means to drown herself!"

But their fears were vain. Martial's mistress swam like an otter, and,
with a few more vigorous strokes, the intrepid creature had reached the
land. She gained her feet, and, to assist her in climbing up the bank,
she took hold of one of the stakes used as a sort of protecting stockade
at the extremity of the isle, when at that instant, as partially in the
water and holding on by one hand, she saw drifting along the form of a
young female, dressed after the fashion of the country girls who come to
Paris with their wares. The body floated slowly on with the current,
which drove it against the piles, while the garments served to render it
buoyant. To cling to one of the strongest stakes, and with the hand left
free to snatch at the clothes of the female as it was passing, was the
instantaneous impulse of La Louve,--an impulse executed as rapidly as
conceived. In her extreme eagerness, however, she drew the unfortunate
being she sought to save so suddenly and violently towards herself and
within the small enclosure formed by the piles, that the body sunk
completely under water, though here it was shallow enough to walk to
land. Gifted with skill and strength far from common, La Louve raised La
Goualeuse (for she it was, although not as yet recognised by her late
friend), took her up in her powerful arms as though she had been a
child, and laid her on the grassy banks of the isle.

"Courage! Courage!" shouted M. de Saint-Remy, from the opposite side,
having, as well as Doctor Griffon, witnessed this bold deliverance. "We
will make all haste to cross the bridge of Asnières, and bring a boat to
your assistance."

After thus speaking, both the count and his companion proceeded as
quickly as they were able in the direction of the bridge; but La Louve
heard not the words addressed to her.

Let us again repeat, that, from the right bank of the Seine, on which
Nicholas, Calabash, and their mother assembled after the commission of
their atrocious crime, it was impossible, owing to its steepness, to
observe what was passing on the opposite shore. Fleur-de-Marie, abruptly
drawn by La Louve within the piles, having first sunk completely from
the eyes of her murderers, was thus in safety from any further pursuit
on their part, they believing that she had effectually perished.

A few instants after, the current, as it swept by, carried with it a
second body, floating near to the surface of the water; but La Louve
perceived it not. It was the corpse of Madame Séraphin, the notary's
_femme de charge_. She, however, was perfectly dead.

It was as much the interest of Nicholas and Calabash as it was of
Jacques Ferrand to remove so formidable a witness as well as sharer of
their crime; seizing the opportunity, therefore, when the boat sunk with
Fleur-de-Marie, to spring into that rowed by his sister, and in which
was Madame Séraphin, he contrived to give the small vessel so great a
shock as almost threw the _femme de charge_ into the water, and, while
struggling to recover herself, he managed to thrust her overboard, and
then to finish her with his boat-hook.

       *       *       *       *       *

Breathless and exhausted, La Louve, kneeling on the grass beside
Fleur-de-Marie, tried to recover her strength, and, at the same time, to
make out the features of her she had saved from certain death. Who can
describe her surprise, her utter astonishment, as she recognised her
late prison companion,--she who had exercised so beneficial an influence
on her mind, and produced so complete a change in her conduct and ideas?
In the first bewilderment of her feelings even Martial was forgotten.

"La Goualeuse!" exclaimed she, as, with head bent down, her hair
dishevelled, her garments streaming with wet, she, kneeling,
contemplated the unhappy girl stretched almost dying before her on the
grass.

Pale, motionless, her half closed eyes vacant and senseless, her
beautiful hair glued to her pallid brows, her lips blue and livid, her
small, delicate hands stiff and cold, La Goualeuse might well have
passed for dead to any but the watchful eye of affection.

"La Goualeuse!" again cried La Louve. "What a singular chance that I
should have come hither to relate to my man all the good and harm she
has done me with her words and promises, as well as the resolution I
have taken, and to find the poor thing thus to give me the meeting! Poor
girl! She is cold and dead. But, no, no!" exclaimed La Louve, stooping
still more closely over Fleur-de-Marie, and, as she did so, finding a
faint--indeed, almost imperceptible--breath escape her lips; "no, she
lives! Merciful Father, she breathes! And 'tis I have snatched her from
death! I, who never yet saved any one! Oh, how happy the thought makes
me! My heart glows with a new delight. How thankful I feel that none but
I saved her! Ha! but my man,--I must save him also. Perhaps he is even
now in his death-throes--his mother and brother are even wretches
enough to murder him! What shall I do? I cannot leave this poor creature
here,--I will carry her to the widow's house. She must and she shall
succour the poor Goualeuse and let me see Martial, or I will smash
everything in my way. No mother, brother, or sister shall hinder me from
going wherever my man is!"

And, springing up as she spoke, La Louve raised Fleur-de-Marie in her
strong arms. Charged with this slender burthen, she hurried towards the
house, never for a moment doubting that, spite of their hard and wicked
natures, the widow and her daughter would bestow on Fleur-de-Marie every
requisite care.

When Martial's mistress had reached that point of the isle from which
both sides of the Seine were distinguishable, Nicholas, his mother, and
Calabash had quitted the place, certain of the accomplishment of their
double crime; they then repaired, in all haste, to the house of
Bras-Rouge.

At this moment a man who, hidden in one of the recesses of the river
concealed by the lime-kiln, had, without being seen himself, witnessed
the whole progress of this horrible scene, also disappeared; believing,
as well as the guilty perpetrators, that the fell deed had been fully
achieved. This man was Jacques Ferrand.

One of Nicholas's boats was rocking to and fro, moored to a stake on the
river's bank, just by where Madame Séraphin and La Goualeuse had
embarked.

Scarcely had Jacques Ferrand quitted the lime-kiln to return to Paris
than M. de Saint-Remy and Doctor Griffon hastily crossed the bridge of
Asnières, for the purpose of reaching the isle; which they contemplated
doing by means of Nicholas's boat, which they had discerned from afar.

To the extreme astonishment of La Louve, when she arrived at the house
in the Isle du Ravageur, she found the door shut and fastened. Placing
the still inanimate form of Fleur-de-Marie beneath the porch, she more
closely examined the dwelling. The window of Martial's chamber was well
known to her; what was her surprise to find the shutters belonging to it
closed, and sheets of tin nailed over them, strongly secured from
without by two bars of iron!

Suspecting a part of the cause of this, La Louve, in a loud, hoarse
voice of mingled fury and deep tenderness, screamed out as loudly as she
could:

"Martial! My man!"

No answer was returned.

Terrified at this silence, La Louve began pacing round and round the
house like a wild beast who scents the spot whither her mate has been
entrapped, and with deep roars and savage growls demands admittance to
him.

Still pursuing her agitated search, La Louve kept shouting from time to
time, "My man! Are you there, my man?" And in her desperate fury she
shook and rattled the bars of the kitchen windows, beat against the
walls, and knocked long and loudly at the door. All at once a dull,
indistinct noise was heard from withinside the house. Eagerly and
attentively La Louve listened; the noise, however, ceased.

"My man heard me! I must and will get in somehow, if I gnaw the door
away with my teeth."

And again she reiterated her frantic cries and adjurations to Martial.
Several faint blows struck inside the closed shutters of Martial's
chamber replied to the yells and screams of La Louve.

"He is there!" cried she, suddenly stopping beneath the window of her
lover. "He is there! I am sure of it; and if all other means fail I will
strip off that tin with my nails, but I will wrench those shutters
open!"

So saying, she glanced frantically around in search of something to aid
her efforts to free her lover, when her eye caught sight of a ladder
partly hanging against one of the outside shutters of the sitting-room.
Hastily pulling the shutter, the more quickly to disengage the ladder,
the key of the outer door, left by the widow on the sill of the window,
fell to the ground.

"Oh, if this be only the right key!" cried La Louve, trying it in the
lock of the entrance door; "I can go straight up stairs to his chamber.
Oh, it turns! It opens!" exclaimed La Louve, with delight; "and my man
is saved!"

Once in the kitchen she was struck by the cries of the two children,
who, shut up in the cellar, and hearing an unusual noise, called loudly
for help. The widow, persuaded that no person would visit the isle or
her dwelling, had contented herself with double-locking the door upon
François and Amandine, leaving the key in the lock.

Released by La Louve, the two children hurried from the cellar to the
kitchen.

"Oh, La Louve!" exclaimed François, "save our dear Brother Martial; they
want him to die! For two days he has been shut up in his room!"

"They have not wounded him, have they?"

"No, no, I think not!"

"I have arrived just in time, it seems," cried La Louve, rushing towards
the staircase, and hastily mounting the stairs. Then, suddenly stopping,
she exclaimed, "Ah, but La Goualeuse! I quite forgot her. Amandine, my
child, light a fire directly; and then do you and your brother fetch a
poor, half-drowned girl you will find lying outside the door under the
porch, and place her before the fire. She would have been quite dead, if
I had not saved her. François, quick! Bring me a crowbar, a hatchet, an
axe, anything, that I may break in the door that confines my man!"

"There is the cleaver we split wood with, but it is too heavy for you,"
said the lad, dragging forward an enormous chopper.

"Too heavy! I don't even feel it!" cried La Louve, swinging the
ponderous weapon, which, at another time, she would have had much
difficulty in lifting, as though it had been a feather.

Then, proceeding with hurried steps up-stairs, she called out to the
children:

"Go and fetch the young girl I told you of, and place her by the fire."

And, with two bounds, La Louve reached the corridor, at the end of which
was situated the apartment of Martial.

"Courage! Courage, my man! Your Louve is here!" cried she, and, lifting
the cleaver with both hands, she dashed it furiously against the door.

"It is fastened on the outside," moaned Martial, in a feeble voice;
"draw out the nails,--you cannot open it otherwise."

Throwing herself upon her knees in the passage, by the help of the edge
of the cleaver, her nails, which she almost tore bleeding from their
roots, and her fingers, which were lacerated and torn, La Louve
contrived to extract the huge nails which fastened the door all around.
At length her heroic exertions were crowned with success,--the door
yielded to her efforts, and Martial, pale, bleeding, and almost
exhausted, fell into the arms of his mistress.

"At last--I have you--I hold you--I press you to my heart!" exclaimed La
Louve, as she received and tenderly pressed Martial in her arms, with a
joy of possession that partook almost of savage energy. She supported,
or, rather, carried him to a bench placed in the corridor. For several
minutes Martial remained weak and haggard, endeavouring to recover from
the violent surprise which had proved nearly too much for his exhausted
strength. La Louve had come to the succour of her lover at the very
instant when, worn-out and despairing, he felt himself dying,--less from
want of food than air, which it was impossible to obtain in so small an
apartment, unprovided with a chimney or any other outlet, and
hermetically closed, thanks to the fiendish contrivance of Calabash, who
had stopped even the most trifling crevices in the door and window with
pieces of old rag.

Trembling with joy and apprehension, her eyes streaming with tears, La
Louve, kneeling beside Martial, watched his slightest movements, and
intently gazed on his features. The unfortunate youth seemed gradually
to recover as his lungs inhaled a freer and more healthful atmosphere.
After a few convulsive shudderings he raised his languid head, heaved a
deep sigh, and, opening his eyes, looked eagerly around him.

"Martial! 'Tis I!--your Louve! How are you now?"

"Better!" replied he, in a feeble voice.

"Thank God! Will you have a little water or some vinegar?"

"No, no," replied Martial, speaking more naturally; "air, air! Oh, I
want only air!"

At the risk of gashing the backs of her hands, La Louve drove them
through the four panes of a window she could not have opened without
first removing a large and heavy table.

"Now I breathe! I breathe freely! And my head seems quite relieved!"
said Martial, entirely recovering his senses and voice.

Then, as if recalling for the first time the service his mistress had
rendered him, he exclaimed, with a burst of ineffable gratitude:

"But for you, my brave Louve, I should soon have been dead!"

"Oh, never mind thinking of that! But tell me, how do you find yourself
now?"

"Better--much better!"

"You are hungry, I doubt not?"

"No; I feel myself too weak for that. What I have suffered most cruelly
from has been want of air. At last I felt suffocating, strangling,
choking. Oh, it was dreadful!"

"But now?"

"I live again. I come forth from the very tomb itself; and that, too,
thanks to you!"

"And these cuts upon your poor bleeding hands! For God's sake, what have
they done to you?"

"Nicholas and Calabash, not daring to attack me openly a second time,
fastened me up in my chamber to allow me to perish of hunger in it. I
tried to prevent their nailing up my shutters, and my sister chopped my
fingers with a hatchet."

"The monsters! They wished to make it appear that you had died of
sickness. Your mother had spread the report of your being in a hopeless
state. Your mother, my man,--your own mother!"

"Hold!" cried Martial, with bitterness; "mention her not." Then for the
first time remarking the wet garments and singular state of La Louve's
attire, he added, "But what has happened to you? Your hair is dripping
wet; you have only your underclothes on; and they are drenched through."

"No matter, no matter what has happened to me, since you are saved. Oh,
yes,--saved!"

"But explain to me how you became thus wet through."

"I knew you were in danger, and finding no boat--"

"You swam to my rescue?"

"I did. But your hands? Give them to me that I may heal them with my
kisses! You are in pain, I fear? Oh, the monsters! And I not here to
help you!"

"Oh, my brave Louve!" exclaimed Martial, enthusiastically; "bravest and
best of all brave creatures!"

"Did not your hand trace on my arm 'Death to the cowardly?' See!" cried
La Louve, showing her tattooed arm, on which these very words were
indelibly engraved.

"Yes, you are bold and intrepid; but the cold has seized you,--you
tremble!"

"Indeed, it is not with cold."

"Never mind,--go in there. You will find Calabash's cloak; wrap yourself
well in it."

"But--"

"I insist!"

In an instant La Louve, who had quickly flown at her lover's second
command, returned wrapped in a plaid mantle.

"To think you ran the risk of drowning yourself,--and all for me!"
resumed Martial, gazing on her with enthusiastic delight.

"Oh, no, not altogether for you. A poor girl was nearly perishing in the
river, and I saved her as I landed."

"Saved her also. And where is she?"

"Below with the children, who are taking care of her."

"And who is she?"

"Oh, dear, you can scarcely credit what a singular and lucky chance
brought me to her rescue! She was one of my companions at St. Lazare,--a
most extraordinary sort of girl. Oh, you don't half know--"

"How so?"

"Only conceive my both hating and loving her; for she had introduced
happiness and death into my heart and thoughts."

"Who? This girl?"

"Yes; and all on your account."

"On mine?"

"Hark ye, Martial!" Then interrupting her proposed speech, La Louve
continued, "No, no; I never, never can--"

"What?"

"I had a request to make to you, and for that purpose I came hither;
because when I quitted Paris I knew nothing of your danger."

"Then speak,--pray do!"

"I dare not."

"Dare not,--after all you have done for me?"

"No; for then it would appear as though I claimed a right to be
rewarded."

"A right to be rewarded? And have you not already earned that right? Do
I not already owe you much? And did you not tend my sick bed with
unfailing watchfulness, both night and day during my illness of the past
year?"

"Are you not 'my man,--my own dear man?'"

"And for the reason that I am and ever shall be 'your man,' are you not
bound to speak openly and candidly to me?"

"For ever, Martial?"

"Yes, for ever; as true as my name is Martial. I shall never care for
any other woman in the world but you, my brave Louve. Never mind what
you may have been, or what you may have done; that is nobody's affair
but mine. I love you, and you love me; and, moreover, I owe you my life.
But somehow, do you know, since you have been in prison I have not been
like the same person. All sorts of fresh thoughts have come into my
mind. I have thought it well over, and I have resolved that you shall no
more be what you have been."

"What can you mean?"

"That I will never more quit you; neither will I part from François and
Amandine."

"Your young sister and brother?"

"Yes; from this day forward I must be as a second father to these poor
children. Don't you see, by imposing on myself fresh duties, I am
compelled to alter and amend what is amiss in my way of conducting
myself? But I consider it my positive task to take charge of these young
things, or they will be made artful thieves. And the only way to save
them is to take them from here."

"Where to?"

"That I know not; but certainly far from Paris."

"And me?"

"You? Why, of course, you go with me!"

"With you?" exclaimed La Louve, with joyful surprise,--she could not
credit the reality of such happiness. "And shall I never again be parted
from you?"

"No, my brave girl--never! You will help me to bring up my little sister
and young brother. I know your heart. When I say to you, 'I greatly wish
my poor little Amandine to grow up a virtuous and industrious woman.
Just talk to her about it, and show her what to do,' I am quite sure and
certain that you will be to her all the best mother could be to her own
child."

"Oh, thanks, Martial,--thanks, thanks!"

"We shall live like honest workpeople. Never fear but we shall find
work; for we will toil like slaves to content our employers; but, at
least, these children will not be depraved and degraded beings like
their parents. I shall not continually hear myself taunted with my
father and brother's disgraceful end, neither shall I go through streets
where you are known. But what is the matter,--what ails you?"

"Oh, Martial, I feel as though I should go mad."

"Mad!--for what?"

"For joy."

"And why should you go mad with joy?"

"Because--because,--it is too much--"

"What?"

"I mean that what you propose is too great happiness for one like me to
hope for. Oh, indeed, indeed, it is more than I can bear! But who knows?
Perhaps saving La Goualeuse has brought me good luck,--that's it, I am
sure and certain."

"Still, I ask you, what is the matter, and why are you thus agitated?"
exclaimed Martial.

"Oh, Martial, Martial, the very thing you have been proposing--"

"Well?"

"I was going to ask you."

"To quit Paris?"

"Yes," replied she, in a hurried tone; "and to try your consent to
accompany you to the forests, where we should have a nice, neat little
house, and children whom I should love as La Louve would the children of
her man--or, if you would permit me," continued La Louve, in a faltering
voice, "instead of calling you 'my man,' to say 'my husband?' For,"
added she, confusedly and rapidly, "for without that change, we should
not obtain the place."

Martial, in his turn, regarded La Louve with deep astonishment, unable
to comprehend her meaning.

"What place are you speaking of?" said he, at length.

"Of that of gamekeeper."

"That I should have?"

"Yes."

"And who would give it to me?"

"The protector of the young girl I saved."

"They do not know me."

"But I have told her all about you, and she will recommend us to her
protector."

"And what have you told her about me?"

"Oh, Martial, can you not guess? Of what could I speak but of your
goodness--and my love for you?"

"My excellent Louve!"

"And then, you know, being in prison together makes folks talk to each
other, and open their hearts in the way of confidence. Besides which,
there was something so gentle and engaging about this young creature,
that I could not help feeling drawn towards her, even in spite of
myself; for I very quickly discovered she was a very different person to
such as you and I have been used to."

"And who is she?"

"I know not, neither can I guess; but certainly I never met with any one
like her. Bless you, she can read the very thoughts of your heart, the
same as if she were a fairy. I merely told her of my love for you, and
she immediately interested herself in us. She made me feel ashamed of my
past life; not by saying harsh and severe things,--you know very well
that would not have done much good with me,--but by talking of the
pleasures of a life passed in hard but peaceful labour, tranquilly
within the quiet shades of deep forests, where you might be occupied
according to your tastes and inclinations; only, instead of your being a
poacher, she made you a gamekeeper, and in place of my being only your
mistress, she pictured me as your true and lawful wife. And then we were
to have fine, healthy children who ran joyfully to meet you when you
returned at night, followed by your faithful dogs, and carrying your gun
on your shoulder. Then we all sat down so gay and happy, to eat our
supper beneath the cool shade of the large trees that overhung our
cottage door, while the fresh wind blew, and the moon peeped at us from
amongst the thick branches, and the little ones prattled and you related
to us all you had seen and done during the day, while wandering in the
forests; until, at last, cheerful and contented, we retired to rest, to
rise the following day, and with light hearts to recommence our labours.
I cannot tell you how it was, but I listened and listened to these
delightful pictures till I quite believed in their reality. I seemed
bound by a spell when she spoke of happiness like this, though I tried
ever so much against it. I always found it impossible to disbelieve that
it would surely come to pass. Oh, but you have no idea how beautifully
she described it all! I fancied I saw it--you--our children--our forest
home. I rubbed my eyes, but it was ever before them, although a waking
dream."

"Ah, yes!" said Martial, sighing; "that would, indeed, be a sweet and
pleasant life! Without being bad at heart, poor François has been quite
enough in the society of Calabash and Nicholas to make it far better he
should dwell in the solitude of woods and forests, rather than be
exposed to the further contamination of great towns. Amandine would help
you in your household duties, and I should make a capital gamekeeper,
from the very fact of my having been a poacher of some notoriety. I
should have you for my housekeeper and companion, my good Louve; and
then, as you know, we should have our children also. Bless their little
hearts, I doubt not our having a fine flock about us! And what more
could we wish for or desire? When once we got used to a forest life, it
would seem as though we had always lived there; and fifty or a hundred
years would glide away like a single day. But you must not talk to me of
such happiness; it makes one so full of sadness and regrets that it
cannot be realised. No, no, don't let us ever mention it again; because,
don't you see, La Louve, it comes over one like--I should soon work
myself up to madness if I allowed my thoughts to dwell on it."

"Ah, Martial, I let you go on because I thought I was quite as bad
myself. I said just those very words to La Goualeuse."

"Did you, really?"

"I did, indeed. For, after listening to all these tales of enchantment,
I said to her, 'What a pity, La Goualeuse, that these castles in the
air, as you call them, are not true!' And what do you think, Martial,"
asked La Louve, her eyes flashing with joy, "what do you think she
answered me?"

"I don't know."

"'Why,' said she, 'only let Martial marry you, and give me your promise
to live honestly and virtuously henceforward, and directly I quit the
prison I will exert myself to get the place I have been speaking of for
him.'"

"Get me a gamekeeper's place?"

"Yes; I declare to you, Martial, she said so."

"Oh, but as you say, that can be but a dream--a mere fancy. If, indeed,
nothing were requisite for our obtaining the place but our being
married, my good girl, that should be done to-morrow, if I had the
means; though, from this very day and hour, I consider you as my true
and lawful wife."

"Oh, Martial! I your lawful wife?"

"The only woman who shall ever bear that title. And, for the future, I
wish you to call me 'husband;' for such I am in word and heart, as
firmly and lastingly as though we had been before the _maire_."

"Oh, La Goualeuse was right. A woman feels so proud and happy to say 'My
husband!' Oh, Martial, you shall see what a good, faithful, devoted wife
I will be to you; how hard I will work! Oh, I shall be so delighted to
labour for you!"

"And do you really think there is any chance of our getting this place?"

"If the poor dear Goualeuse deceives herself about it, it is that others
deceive her; for she seemed quite sure of being able to fulfil her
promises. And besides, when I was quitting the prison a little while
ago, the inspectress told me that the protectors of La Goualeuse, who
were people of rank and consequence, had removed her from confinement
that very day. Now that proved her having powerful friends; so that she
can keep her word to us if she likes."

"But," cried Martial, suddenly rising, "I don't know what we have been
thinking of all this time!"

"Thinking about--what do you mean, Martial?"

"Why, the poor girl you saved from drowning is down-stairs--perhaps
dying; and, instead of rendering her any assistance, we are attending to
our own affairs up-stairs."

"Make yourself perfectly easy; François and Amandine are there watching
her, and they would have come to call us had there been any danger or
necessity. Still you are right; let us go to her. You must see her to
whom we shall, perhaps, owe all our future happiness."

And Martial, supported by La Louve, descended to the lower part of the
house. Before they have reached the kitchen, let us in a few words
describe what had occurred there from the time when Fleur-de-Marie had
been confided to the charge of the two children.




CHAPTER XVII.

DOCTOR GRIFFON.


François and Amandine had contrived to convey Fleur-de-Marie near the
fire, when M. de Saint-Remy and Doctor Griffon, who had crossed the
river in Nicholas's boat, entered the house. Whilst the children were
making the fire burn up, Doctor Griffon bestowed on the young girl his
utmost care.

"The poor girl cannot be more than seventeen at most!" exclaimed the
count, who was looking on. "What do you think of her, doctor?"

"Her pulse is scarcely perceptible; but, strange to say, the skin of the
face is not livid in the subject, as is usually the case in asphyxia
from submersion," replied the doctor, with professional calmness, and
contemplating Fleur-de-Marie with a deeply meditative air.

Doctor Griffon was a tall, thin man, pallid and completely bald, except
two tufts of thin black hair, carefully brushed back on the poll, and
flattened on the temples. His countenance, wrinkled and furrowed by the
fatigues of study, was calm, intelligent, and reflective. Profoundly
learned, of great experience, and a skilful practitioner, first surgeon
at a civil hospital, where we shall again encounter him, Doctor Griffon
had but one defect, that of completely abstracting himself from the
patient, and only considering the disease. Young or old, rich or poor,
was no matter,--he only thought of medical fact, more or less
remarkable, which the subject presented. For him there was nothing but
subjects.

"What a lovely face! How beautiful she is in spite of this frightful
paleness!" said M. de Saint-Remy. "Did you ever see milder or more
expressive features, my dear doctor? And so young--so young!"

"Age is no consequence," said the doctor, abruptly, "no more than the
presence of water in the lungs, which was formerly thought fatal. It was
a gross error, which the admirable experiments of Goodwin--the famous
Goodwin--incontestably detected and exposed."

"But doctor--"

"But it is a fact," replied M. Griffon, absorbed by the love of his art.
"To detect the presence of any foreign liquid in the lungs, Goodwin
plunged some cats and dogs several times into tubs filled with ink for
some seconds, taking them out alive, and then, after a time, dissected
the animals. Well, he was convinced from the dissection that the ink had
penetrated the lungs, and that the presence of this liquid in the
respiratory organs had not caused the death of the subject."

The count knew the doctor was a worthy creature at heart, but that his
mad passion for science made him often appear harsh and cruel.

"Have you any hope?" inquired M. de Saint-Remy, impatiently.

"The extremities of the subject are very cold," said the doctor; "there
is but very slight hope."

"Ah, poor child! To die at that age is indeed terrible!"

"Pupil fixed--dilated!" observed the doctor, impassive, and pushing up
the frigid eyelid of Fleur-de-Marie with his forefinger.

"What a singular man!" exclaimed the comte, almost with indignation.
"One would suppose you pitiless, and yet I have seen you watch by my
bedside for nights together. Had I been your brother, you could not have
been more generously devoted to me."

Doctor Griffon, still occupied in doing all that was requisite and
possible for Fleur-de-Marie, replied to the comte without looking at
him, and with imperturbable phlegm:

"_Parbleu!_ Do you think one meets with an intermittent fever so
wonderfully complicated as that you had! It was wonderful, my dear
friend--astonishing! Stupor, delirium, muscular action of the tendons,
syncopes,--that important fever combined the most varied symptoms. You
were, indeed, affected by a partial and momentary attack of paralysis;
and, if it had presented nothing else, why, your attack was entitled to
all the attention in my power. You presented a magnificent study; and,
truth to say, my dear friend, what I desire most in the world is to meet
with such another glorious fever. But that is a piece of good fortune
that never occurs twice!"

At this moment Martial descended, leaning on the arm of La Louve, who
still retained over her wet clothes the plaid cloak which belonged to
Calabash. Struck with the paleness of Martial, and remarking his hands
covered with dried blood, the comte exclaimed, "Who is this man?"

"My husband!" replied La Louve, looking at Martial with an expression of
happiness and noble pride impossible to describe.

"You have a good and intrepid wife, sir," said the comte to him. "I saw
her save this unfortunate young girl with singular courage."

"Yes, sir, my wife is good and intrepid," replied Martial, with
emphasis, and regarding La Louve with an air at once full of love and
tenderness. "Yes, intrepid; for she has also come in time to save my
life."

"Your life?" exclaimed the comte.

"Look at his hands--his poor hands!" said La Louve, wiping away the
tears which softened the wild brightness of her eyes.

"Horrible!" cried the comte. "See, doctor, how his hands are hacked!"

Doctor Griffon, turning his head slightly, and looking over his shoulder
at Martial's hands, said to him, "Open and shut your hand."

Martial did so with considerable pain. The doctor shrugged his
shoulders, and continued his attentions to Fleur-de-Marie, saying
merely, and as if with regret:

"There's nothing serious in those cuts,--there's no tendon injured. In a
week the subject will be able to use his hands again."

"Then, sir, my husband will not be crippled?" said La Louve, with
gratitude.

The doctor shook his head affirmatively.

"And La Goualeuse will recover--won't she, sir?" inquired La Louve. "Oh,
she must live, for I and my husband owe her so much!" Then turning
towards Martial, "Poor dear girl! There she is, as I told you,--she who
will, perhaps, be the cause of our happiness; for it was she who gave me
the idea of coming and saying to you all I have said. What a chance that
I should save her--and here, too!"

"She is a providence," said Martial, struck by the beauty of La
Goualeuse. "What an angel's face! Oh, she will recover, will she not,
doctor?"

"I cannot say," replied the doctor. "But, in the first place, can she
remain here? Will she have all necessary attention?"

"Here?" cried La Louve; "why, they commit murder here!"

"Silence--silence!" said Martial.

The comte and the doctor looked at La Louve with surprise.

"This house in the isle has a bad reputation hereabouts, and I am not
astonished at it," observed the doctor, in a low tone, to M. de
Saint-Remy.

"You have, then, been the victim of some violence?" observed the comte
to Martial. "How did you come by those wounds?"

"They are nothing--nothing, sir. I had a quarrel--a struggle ensued, and
I was wounded. But this young peasant girl cannot remain in this house,"
he added, with a gloomy air. "I cannot remain here myself--nor my wife,
nor my brother, nor my sister, whom you see. We are going to leave the
isle, never to return to it."

"Oh, how nice!" exclaimed the two children.

"Then what are we to do?" said the doctor, looking at Fleur-de-Marie.
"It is impossible to think of conveying the subject to Paris in her
present state of prostration. But then my house is quite close at hand,
my gardener's wife and her daughter are capital nurses; and since this
asphyxia by submersion interests you, my dear Saint-Remy, why, you can
watch over the necessary attentions, and I will come and see her every
day."

"And you assume the harsh and pitiless man," exclaimed the comte, "when,
as your proposal proves, you have one of the noblest hearts in the
world!"

"If the subject sinks under it, as is possible, there will be an
opportunity for a most interesting dissection, which will allow me to
confirm once again Goodwin's assertions."

"How horridly you talk!" cried the comte.

"For those who know how to read, the dead body is a book in which they
learn to save the lives of the diseased!" replied Dr. Griffon,
stoically.

"At last, then, you do good?" said M. de Saint-Remy, with bitterness;
"and that is important. What consequence is the cause provided that
benefit results? Poor child! The more I look at her the more she
interests me."

"And well does she deserve it, I can tell you, sir," observed La Louve,
with excitement, and approaching him.

"Do you know her?" inquired the comte.

"Do I know her, sir? Why, it is to her I owe the happiness of my life;
and I have not done for her half what she has done for me." And La Louve
looked passionately towards her husband,--she no longer called him her
man!

"And who is she?" asked M. de Saint-Remy.

"An angel, sir,--all that is good in this world. Yes; and although she
is dressed as a country girl, there is no merchant's wife, no great
lady, who can discourse as well as she can, with her sweet little voice
just like music. She is a noble girl, I say,--full of courage and
goodness."

"By what accident did she fall into the water?"

"I do not know, sir."

"Then she is not a peasant girl?" asked the comte.

"A peasant girl,--look at her small white hands, sir!"

"True," observed M. de Saint-Remy; "what a strange mystery! But her
name--her family?"

"Come along," said the doctor, breaking into the conversation; "we must
convey the subject into the boat."

Half an hour after this, Fleur-de-Marie, who had not yet recovered her
senses, was in the doctor's abode, lying in a good bed, and maternally
watched by M. Griffon's gardener's wife, to whom was added La Louve. The
doctor promised M. de Saint-Remy, who was more and more interested in La
Goualeuse, to return to see her again in the evening. Martial went to
Paris with François and Amandine, La Louve being unwilling to quit
Fleur-de-Marie before she had been pronounced out of danger.

The Isle du Ravageur remained deserted. We shall presently find its
sinister inhabitants at Bras-Rouge's, where they were to be joined by
the Chouette for the murder of the diamond-matcher. In the meantime we
will conduct the reader to the rendezvous which Tom, Sarah's brother,
had with the horrible hag, the Schoolmaster's accomplice.




CHAPTER XVIII.

THE PORTRAIT.


Thomas Seyton, the brother of the Countess Sarah Macgregor, was walking
impatiently on the boulevards near the Observatory, when he saw the
Chouette arrive. The horrible beldame had on a white cap and her usual
plaid shawl. The point of a stiletto, as round as a thick swan's quill,
and very sharp, having perforated a hole at the bottom of her large
straw basket which she carried on her arm, the extremity of this
murderous weapon, which had belonged to the Schoolmaster, might be seen
projecting. Thomas Seyton did not perceive that the Chouette was armed.

"It has just struck three by the Luxembourg," said the old woman. "Here
I am, like the hand of the clock."

"Come," replied Thomas Seyton. And, preceding her, he crossed some open
fields; and turning down a deserted alley near the Rue Cassini, he
stopped half way down the lane, which was barred by a turnstile, opened
a small door, motioned to the Chouette to follow him; and, after having
advanced with her a few steps down a path overgrown by thick trees, he
said, "Wait here," and disappeared.

"That is, if you don't keep me on the 'waiting lay' too long," responded
the Chouette; "for I must be at Bras Rouge's at five o'clock to meet the
Martials, and help silence the diamond-matcher. It's very well I have my
'gulley' (poniard). Oh, the vagabond, he has got his nose out of
window!" added the hag, as she saw the point of the stiletto coming
through the seam in the basket. And taking the weapon, which had a
wooden handle, from the basket, she replaced it so that it was
completely concealed. "This is _fourline's_ tool," she continued, "and
he has asked me for it so many times to kill the rats who came skipping
about him in his cellar. Poor things! They have no one but the old blind
man to divert them and keep them company. They ought not to be hurt if
they play about a bit; and so I will not let him hurt the dears, and I
keep his tool to myself. Besides, I shall soon want it for this woman,
perhaps. Thirty thousand francs' worth of diamonds,--what a 'haul' for
each of us! It'll be a good day's work, and not like that of the other
day with that old notary whom I thought to squeeze. It was no use to
threaten him if he would not 'stand some blunt' that I would lay
information that it was his housekeeper who had sent La Goualeuse to me
by Tournemine when she was a little brat. Nothing frightened the old
brute, he called me an old hag, and shoved me out-of-doors. Well, well,
I'll send an anonymous letter to these people at the farm where
Pegriotte was, to inform them that it was the notary who formerly
abandoned her to me. Perhaps they know her family; and when she gets out
of St. Lazare, why, the matter will get too hot for that old brute,
Jacques Ferrand. Some one comes,--ah, it is the pale lady who was
dressed in men's clothes at the _tapis-franc_ of the ogress, and with
the tall fellow who just left me, the same that the _fourline_ and I
robbed by the excavations near Notre-Dame," added the Chouette, as she
saw Sarah appear at the extremity of the walk. "Here's another job for
me, I see; and this little lady must have something to do with our
having carried off La Goualeuse from the farm. If she pays well for
another job of work, why, that will be 'the ticket.'"

As Sarah approached the Chouette, whom she saw again for the first time
since their rencontre at the _tapis-franc_, her countenance expressed
the disdain, the disgust, which persons of a certain rank feel when they
come in contact with low wretches whom they take as tools or
accomplices.

Thomas Seyton, who, until now, had actively served the criminal
machinations of his sister, although he considered them as all but
futile, had refused any longer to continue this contemptible part,
consenting, nevertheless, for the first and last time to put his sister
in communication with the Chouette, without himself interfering in the
fresh projects they might plan. The countess, unable to win back Rodolph
to her by breaking the bonds or the affections which she believed so
dear to him, hoped, as we have seen, to render him the dupe of a base
deceit, the success of which might realise the vision of this obstinate,
ambitious, and cruel woman. Her design was to persuade Rodolph that
their daughter was not dead, and to substitute an orphan for the child.

We know that Jacques Ferrand--having formally refused to participate in
this plot in spite of Sarah's menaces--had resolved to make away with
Fleur-de-Marie, as much from the fear of the Chouette's disclosure, as
from fear of the obstinate persistence of the countess. But the latter
had by no means abandoned her design, feeling persuaded that she should
corrupt or intimidate the notary when she should be assured of having
obtained a young girl capable of filling the character which she desired
her to assume.

After a moment's silence Sarah said to the Chouette, "You are adroit,
discreet, and resolute?"

"Adroit as a monkey, resolute as a bulldog, and mute as a fish; such is
the Chouette, and such the devil made her; at your service if you want
her,--and you do," replied the old wretch, quickly. "I hope we have
managed well with the young country wench who is now in St. Lazare for
two good months."

"We are not talking of her, but of something else."

"Anything you please, my handsome lady, provided there's money at the
end of what you mean to propose, and then we shall be as right as my
fingers."

Sarah could not control a movement of disgust. "You must know," she
resumed, "many people in the lower ranks of life,--persons who are in
misfortune?"

"There are more of them than there are of millionaires; you may pick and
choose. We have plentiful wretchedness in Paris."

"I want to meet with a poor orphan girl, and particularly if she lost
her parents young. She must be good-looking, of gentle disposition, and
not more than seventeen years of age."

The Chouette gazed at Sarah with amazement.

"Such an orphan girl must be by no means difficult to meet with,"
continued the countess; "there are so many foundling children!"

"Why, my good lady, you forget La Goualeuse. She is the very thing."

"Who is La Goualeuse?"

"The young thing we carried off from Bouqueval."

"We are not talking of her now, I tell you."

"But hear me, and be sure you pay me well for my advice. You want an
orphan girl, as quiet as a lamb, as handsome as daylight, and who is
only seventeen, you say?"

"Certainly."

"Well, then, take La Goualeuse when she leaves St. Lazare; she is the
very thing for you, as if we had made her on purpose. For she was about
six years of age when that scamp, Jacques Ferrand (and it's now ten
years ago), gave her to me with a thousand francs, in order to get rid
of her,--that is to say, it was Tournemine, who is now at the galleys at
Rochefort, who brought her to me, saying there was no doubt she was
some child they wanted to get rid of or pass off for dead."

"Jacques Ferrand, do you say?" exclaimed Sarah, in a voice so choked
that the Chouette receded several paces. "The notary, Jacques Ferrand,
gave you this child--and--?" She could not finish, her emotion was too
violent; and with her two clasped hands extended towards the Chouette,
she trembled convulsively, surprise and joy agitating her features.

"I don't know what it is that makes you so much in earnest, my good
lady," replied the old hag; "but it is a very simple story. Ten years
ago Tournemine, an old pal of mine, said to me: 'Have you a mind to take
charge of a little girl that they want to get out of the way? No matter
whether she slips her wind or not. There's a thousand francs for the
job, and do what you like with the 'kinchin.'"

"Ten years ago?" cried Sarah.

"Ten years."

"A little fair girl?"

"A little fair girl."

"With blue eyes?"

"Blue eyes--as blue as blue bells."

"And it was she who was at the farm?"

"And we packed her up and carted her off to St. Lazare. I must say,
though, that I didn't expect to find her--Pegriotte--in the country as I
did, though."

"Oh, _mon Dieu!_ _mon Dieu!_" exclaimed Sarah, falling on her knees, and
elevating her hands and eyes to heaven, "Thy ways are inscrutable, and I
bow down before thy providence! Oh, if such happiness be possible! But,
no, I cannot yet believe it; it would be too fortunate! No!" Then rising
suddenly she said to the Chouette, who was gazing at her with the utmost
astonishment, "Follow me!" And Sarah walked before her with hasty steps.

At the end of the alley she ascended several steps that led by a glass
door to a small room sumptuously furnished. At the moment when the
Chouette was about to enter, Sarah made a sign to her to remain outside,
and then rang the bell violently. A servant appeared.

"I am not at home to anybody, and let no one enter here,--no one, do you
hear?"

The servant bowed and retired. Sarah, for the sake of greater security,
pushed to the bolt. The Chouette heard the order given to the servant,
and saw Sarah fasten the bolt. The countess then turning towards her,
said: "Come in quickly, and shut the door."

The Chouette did as she was bidden.

Hastily opening a _secrétaire_, Sarah took from it an ebony coffer,
which she placed on a writing-table in the centre of the room, and
beckoned the Chouette towards her. The coffer was filled with small
caskets lying one upon the other, and containing splendid jewelry. Sarah
was in so much haste to arrive at the bottom of the coffer, that she
hastily scattered over the table these jewel-cases, splendidly filled
with necklaces, bracelets, tiaras of rubies, emeralds, and diamonds,
which sparkled with a thousand fires.

The Chouette was dazzled. She was armed, was alone with the countess;
escape was easy--certain. An infernal idea shot through the brain of
this monster. But to put this new crime into execution it was necessary
to extricate her stiletto from her basket, and approach Sarah without
exciting her suspicions.

With the craft of the tiger-cat, who grovels along treacherously towards
its prey, the beldame profited by the countess's preoccupation to move
imperceptibly around the table which separated her from her victim. The
Chouette had already begun her perfidious movement, when she was
compelled suddenly to stop short. Sarah took a locket from the bottom of
the box, leaned over the table, and, handing it to the Chouette with a
trembling hand, said:

"Look at this portrait."

"It is Pegriotte!" exclaimed the Chouette, struck with the strong
resemblance; "it is the little girl who was handed to me! I think I see
her just as she was when Tournemine brought her to me. That's just like
her long curling hair, which I cut off and sold directly, _ma foi!_"

"You recognise her; it is really she? Oh, I conjure you, do not deceive
me--do not deceive me!"

"I tell you, my good lady, it is Pegriotte, as if I saw herself there,"
said the Chouette, trying to draw nearer to Sarah without being
remarked. "And even now she is very like this portrait; if you saw her
you would be struck by the likeness."

Sarah had not uttered one cry of pain or alarm when she learned that her
daughter had been for ten years leading a wretched existence, forsaken
as she was. Not one feeling of remorse was there when she reflected that
she herself had snatched her away disastrously from the peaceful retreat
in which Rodolph had placed her. This unnatural mother did not eagerly
question the Chouette with terrible anxiety as to the past life of the
child. No! In her heart ambition had long since stifled every sentiment
of maternal tenderness. It was not joy at again being restored to a lost
daughter that transported her,--it was the hope of seeing at length
realised the vain dream of her whole existence. Rodolph had felt deeply
interested in this unfortunate girl, had protected her without knowing
her; what would then be his feelings when he discovered that she
was--his daughter? He was free--the countess was a widow! Sarah already
saw the sovereign crown sparkling on her brow.

The Chouette, still stealing on with slow steps, had at length reached
one end of the table, and had her stiletto perpendicularly in her
basket, its handle on a level with the opening, and within her clutch.
She was but a step or two from the countess.

"Do you know how to write?" inquired Sarah of her; and, pushing from her
the casket and gems, she opened a blotting-book, which was by an
inkstand.

"No, madame; I do not!" replied the Chouette, at all risks.

"I will write, then, at your dictation. Tell me all the circumstances of
the abandonment of this little girl."

And Sarah, sitting in an armchair before the writing-table, took up a
pen, and made a sign to the Chouette to come close to her. The old
wretch's one eye sparkled. At last she was standing up, close to the
seat on which Sarah was sitting, and, stooping over a table, was
preparing to write.

"I will read aloud, and then," said the countess, "you can correct any
mistakes."

"Yes, madame," replied the Chouette, narrowly watching every motion of
Sarah; and she furtively introduced her hand into her basket, that she
might be able to grasp the poniard without being observed.

The countess commenced writing.

"I declare that--"

Then interrupting herself, and turning towards the Chouette, who was at
the moment touching the handle of her poniard, Sarah added:

"At what period was the child brought to you?"

"In the month of February, 1827."

"And by whom?" continued Sarah, turning towards the Chouette.

"By Pierre Tournemine, now at the galleys at Rochefort. It was Madame
Séraphin, the notary's housekeeper, who brought the young girl to him."

The countess continued writing, and then read aloud:

"I declare that, in the month of February, 1827, a person named--"

The Chouette had drawn the poniard; already had she raised her arm to
strike her victim between the shoulders; Sarah turned again. The
Chouette, that she might not be off her guard, leaned her right hand,
armed as it was, on the back of Sarah's armchair, and then stooped
towards her, as if in attitude to reply to her question.

"Tell me again the name of the man who handed the child to you?" said
the countess.

"Pierre Tournemine," repeated Sarah, as she wrote it down, "at this time
at the galleys of Rochefort, brought me a child, which had been confided
to him by the housekeeper of--"

The countess could not finish. The Chouette having got rid of her basket
by allowing it to slide from her arm onto the floor, threw herself on
the countess with equal fury and rapidity; and having grasped the back
of her neck with her left hand, forced her face down on the table, and
then with her right hand drove the stiletto in between her two
shoulders.

This atrocious assassination was so promptly effected that the countess
did not utter a cry--a moan. Still sitting, she remained with her head
and the front of her body on the table. Her pen fell from her fingers.

"Just the very blow which _fourline_ gave the little old man in the Rue
du Roule!" said the monster. "One more who will never wag tongue again!
Her account is settled!" And the Chouette, gathering up the jewels
together, huddled them into her basket, not perceiving that her victim
still breathed.

The murder and robbery effected, the horrid old devil opened the glass
door, ran swiftly along the tree-covered path, went out by the small
side door, and reached the lone tract of ground. Near the Observatory
she took a hackney-coach, which drove her to Bras-Rouge's in the Champs
Elysées.

The widow Martial, Nicholas, Calabash, and Barbillon had, as we know, an
appointment with the Chouette in this den of infamy, in order to rob and
murder the diamond-matcher.




CHAPTER XIX.

THE AGENT OF SAFETY.


The reader already knows the Bleeding Heart in the Champs Elysées, near
the Court de la Reine, in one of the deep ditches which, a few years
since, were close to this promenade. The inhabitants of the Isle du
Ravageur had not yet arrived.

After the departure of Bradamanti, who had, as we know, accompanied
Madame d'Harville's stepmother into Normandy, Tortillard had returned to
his father. Placed as a sentinel at the top of the staircase, the little
cripple was to announce the arrival of the Martials by a certain cry,
Bras-Rouge being at this moment in secret conference with an
_agent-de-sûreté_ named Narcisse Borel, whom the reader may perchance
remember to have seen at the _tapis-franc_ of the ogress, when he came
there to arrest two miscreants accused of murder.

This agent, a man about forty years of age, was thickset and powerful,
with a high colour, a keen, quick eye, his face entirely shaven, in
order that he might better assume the various disguises necessary for
his dangerous expeditions; for it was frequently necessary for him to
unite the transformations of the actor to the courage and energy of the
soldier, in order to seize on certain ruffians with whom he had to
contend in cunning and determination. Narcisse Borel was, in a word, one
of the most useful and most active instruments of that providence on a
small scale which is modestly and commonly termed the police.

       *       *       *       *       *

We will return to the conversation between Narcisse Borel and
Bras-Rouge, which appeared to be very animated.

"Yes," said the agent of safety; "you are accused of profiting by your
double-faced position, and of taking with impunity a share in the booty
of a band of most dangerous malefactors, and then giving false
information respecting them to the protective police. Take care,
Bras-Rouge; for if you are detected no mercy will be shown you!"

"Alas! I know I am accused of this; and it is very distressing for me,
my good M. Narcisse," replied Bras-Rouge, whilst his weasel's face
assumed a hypocritical air of vexation. "But I hope that this day will
at last do me justice, and my good faith will be recognised."

"That remains to be proved."

"How can I be distrusted--have I not given proofs? Was it I or was it
not who, at the time, enabled you to apprehend Ambroise Martial, one of
the most dangerous malefactors in Paris, in the very fact?"

"All this is very fine and good; but Ambroise was warned they were going
to arrest him, and if I had not been earlier than the hour you told me
of, he would have escaped."

"Do you think me capable, M. Narcisse, of having secretly told him of
your coming?"

"I only know that I received from the scoundrel a pistol-shot aimed full
at me, but which, fortunately, only grazed my arm."

"Why, to be sure, M. Narcisse, in your profession you must be
occasionally exposed to such mistakes!"

"Ah, you call these mistakes, eh?"

"Certainly; for, no doubt, the wicked fellow intended to lodge the ball
in your body."

"In the arm, body, or head, no matter, I don't complain of that; every
profession has its disagreeables."

"And its pleasures, too, M. Narcisse, and its pleasures. For instance,
when a man as cunning, as skilful, and as courageous as you, has been
for a long time on the track of a gang of villains, whom he follows from
quarter to quarter, from lurking-place to lurking-place, with a good
bloodhound like your poor servant to command, Bras-Rouge, and, finally,
marks them down and comes upon them in a trap from which not one of them
can escape, why, then, you must say, M. Narcisse, that there is great
pleasure in it,--the joy of a sportsman,--not including the service he
renders to justice!" added the host of the Bleeding Heart, with a grave
air.

"I should fully agree with you if the bloodhound were faithful, but I
fear it is not."

"Ah, M. Narcisse, you think--"

"I think that, instead of putting us on the track, you amuse yourself
with setting us on a false scent, and abuse the confidence placed in
you. Every day you promise to aid us to lay hands on the gang, and that
day never arrives."

"What if the day arrives to-day, M. Narcisse, as I am sure it will? What
if I bring together in a parcel Barbillon, Nicholas Martial, the widow,
her daughter, and the Chouette? Will that or will it not be a good sweep
of the net? Will you then mistrust me any longer?"

"No; and you will have rendered a real service; for there are very
strong presumptive facts against this gang,--suspicions almost assured,
but, unfortunately, no proofs."

"So, then, a small fag-end of actual crime, which would allow of their
being apprehended, would help amazingly to unravel the difficult
skein,--eh, M. Narcisse?"

"Most decidedly. And you assure me that there has not been the
slightest incitement on your part towards the _coup_ which they are now
going to attempt?"

"No, on my honour! It is the Chouette, who came to me to propose
inveigling the diamond-matcher here when that infernal hag learned from
my son that Morel, the lapidary, who lives in the Rue du Temple, was a
workman in real stones, and not in false, and that Mother Mathieu had
frequently considerable value about her person, I acceded to the
proposition, and suggested to the Chouette that the Martials and
Barbillon should join her, so that I might be able to put the whole
party into your hands."

"And the Schoolmaster,--that fellow who is so dangerous, so powerful,
and so ferocious, and who was always with the Chouette,--one of the
frequenters of the _tapis-franc_?"

"The Schoolmaster?" said Bras-Rouge, feigning astonishment.

"Yes, a convict escaped from the galleys at Rochefort, Anselm Duresnel
by name, sentenced for life. We know now that he disfigured himself on
purpose, that he might not be recognised. Have you no trace of him?"

"None," replied Bras-Rouge, boldly, for he had his reasons for the lie,
the Schoolmaster being at this very moment shut up in one of the cellars
of the cabaret.

"There is every reason to believe that the Schoolmaster is the author of
fresh murders. He would be an important capture."

"No one knows what has become of him for the last six weeks."

"And that's the reason you are reproached with having lost all trace of
him."

"Always reproaches, M. Narcisse, always!"

"Not for want of ample cause! And how goes on the smuggling?"

"Is it not necessary that I should know something of all kinds of
persons--smugglers as well as others--in order to put you on the scent?
I disclosed to you that pipe to introduce liquids, established outside
the Barrière du Trône, and coming into a house in the street."

"I know that," said Narcisse, interrupting Bras-Rouge; "but for one that
you denounce, you allow ten to escape, and continue your traffic with
impunity. I am sure you eat at two mangers, as the saying is."

"Oh, M. Narcisse, I am incapable of an appetite so dishonest!"

"That is not all: in the Rue du Temple, No. 17, there lives a woman
named Burette, who lends money on deposit, who, they say, is a private
receiver of stolen goods on your account."

"What would you have me do, M. Narcisse? The world is so
slanderous,--says so many wicked things! Once again, I say, it is
necessary for me to mix with as many rogues as possible, that I even
seem one of themselves--so much the worse for them--in order that they
may not have any suspicions; but it cuts me to the heart to imitate
them,--cuts me to the heart. I must, indeed, be devoted to the service,
to give myself up to such a thing as that."

"Poor, dear man! I pity you with all my soul!"

"You are laughing at me, M. Narcisse; but, if that was believed, why has
there not been a search made at Mother Burette's and in my house?"

"You know well enough,--that we might not alarm the ruffians, whom, for
so long a time, you have promised to deliver into our hands."

"And I am now about to deliver them, M. Narcisse; before an hour you
will have them all handcuffed, and that without much trouble, for there
are three women. As to Barbillon and Nicholas Martial, they are as
savage as tigers, but as cowardly as pullets."

"Tigers or pullets," said Narcisse, half opening his long frock coat,
and showing the butts of two pistols in the pockets of his trousers, "I
have wherewithal here for them."

"You will do well to have two of your men with you, M. Narcisse. When
they see themselves caught, the most cowardly sometimes show fight."

"I shall station two of my men in the small parlour at the entrance, by
the side of the room into which you are to introduce the jewel-matcher.
At the first cry, I shall appear at one door, and my two men at the
other."

"You must be speedy, then, for I expect the gang here every moment, M.
Narcisse."

"Very well, I will go at once and place my men, provided that all this
is not another humbug."

The conversation was cut short by the peculiar whistle intended as a
signal. Bras-Rouge looked out of a window to see whom it was that
Tortillard announced.

"Ah, ha! It is the Chouette already. Well, do you believe me now, M.
Narcisse?"

"Why, this looks something like; but it is not all. But we shall see.
And now to station my men."

And the agent of safety disappeared at a side door.




CHAPTER XX.

THE CHOUETTE.


The precipitation of the Chouette's step, the fierce throbbings of a
fever of rapine and murder which still animated her, had suffused her
hideous features with a deep purple, whilst her green eye sparkled with
savage joy. Tortillard followed her, hopping and skipping. At the moment
when she descended the last steps of the stairs, Bras-Rouge's son, from
pure mischief, put his foot on the long and dragging skirts of the
Chouette's gown. This sudden stoppage made the old woman stumble, and,
unable to catch hold of the baluster, she fell on her knees, her two
hands extended, and dropping her precious basket, whence escaped a gold
bracelet set with emeralds and pearls. The Chouette having, in her fall,
somewhat excoriated her fingers, picked up the bracelet, which had not
escaped the keen sight of Tortillard, and, recovering her feet, turned
furiously to the little cripple, who approached her with a hypocritical
air, saying to her:

"Oh, dear me! Did your foot slip?"

Without making any reply, the Chouette seized Tortillard by the hair,
and, stooping to a level with his cheek, she bit it with such fury that
the blood spurted out beneath her teeth. Strange, however, Tortillard,
in spite of his usual vindictiveness, in spite of feeling such intense
pain, did not utter a murmur or a cry. He only wiped his bleeding cheek,
and said, with a forced laugh:

"I hope next time you will not kiss me so hard,--eh, La Chouette?"

"Wicked little brat! Why did you tread on my gown on purpose to make me
fall?"

"Me? Oh! How could you think so? I swear I didn't do it on purpose, my
dear Chouette! Don't think your little Tortillard would do you any harm;
he loves you too well for that. You should never beat him, or scold him,
or bite him, for he is as fond of you as if he were a poor little dog,
and you were his mistress!" said the boy, in a gentle and insinuating
tone.

Deceived by Tortillard's hypocrisy, the Chouette believed him, and
replied:

"Well, well, if I was wrong to bite you, why, let it go for all the
other times you have deserved it, you little villain! But, _vive la
joie_! To-day I bear no malice. Where is your old rogue of a father?"

"In the house. Shall I go and find him for you?"

"No; are the Martials here?"

"Not yet."

"Then I have time to go down and visit _fourline_. I want to speak to
old No-Eyes."

"Will you go into the Schoolmaster's cellar?" inquired Tortillard,
scarcely concealing his diabolical delight.

"What's that to you?"

"To me?"

"Yes, you ask me the question with such an odd air."

"Because I was thinking of something odd."

"What?"

"Why, that you ought, at least, to have brought him a pack of cards to
pass away his time," replied Tortillard, with a cunning look; "that
would divert him a little; now he has nothing to play at but not to be
bitten by the rats; and he always wins at that game, and after awhile it
becomes tiresome."

The Chouette laughed heartily at Tortillard's wit, and said to the
cripple:

"Love of a baby boy to his mammy! I do not know any chap who has more
vice than this scamp. Go and get me a candle, that you may light me down
to see _fourline_, and you can help me to open his door. You know that I
can hardly push it by myself."

"Well, no, it is so very dark in the cellar," said Tortillard, shaking
his head.

"What! What! You who are as wicked as devil to be a coward? I like to
see that, indeed! Go directly, and tell your father that I shall be with
him almost immediately; that I am with _fourline_; and that we are
talking of putting up the banns for our marriage. He, he, he!" added the
disgusting wretch, grinning. "So make haste, and you shall be bridesman,
and, if you are a good boy, you shall have my garter."

Tortillard went, with a sulky air, to fetch a light. Whilst she was
waiting for him, the Chouette, perfectly intoxicated with the success of
her robbery, put her hand into her basket to feel the precious jewels it
enclosed. It was for the purpose of temporarily concealing this treasure
that she desired to descend into the Schoolmaster's cellar, and not,
according to her habit, to enjoy the torments of her new victim.

We will presently explain why, with Bras-Rouge's connivance, the
Chouette had immured the Schoolmaster in the very subterranean cave into
which this miscreant had formerly precipitated Rodolph.

Tortillard, holding a light, now appeared at the door of the cabaret.
The Chouette followed him into the lower room, in which opened the trap
with the folding-doors, with which we are already acquainted.
Bras-Rouge's son, sheltering the light in the hollow of his hand, and
preceding the old woman, slowly descended a stone staircase, which led
to a sharp declivity, at the end of which was the thick door of the
cellar which had so nearly proved Rodolph's grave. When he reached the
bottom of the staircase, Tortillard pretended to hesitate in following
the Chouette.

"Well, now, you little vagabond, go on!" she said.

"Why, it is so dark; and you go so fast, Chouette! And, indeed, I'd
rather go back again, and leave you the light."

"And then, foolish imp, how am I to open the cellar door by myself? Will
you come on?"

"No, I am so frightened!"

"If I begin with you! Mind--"

"If you threaten me, I'll go back again!" and Tortillard retreated
several paces.

"Well, listen to me, now,--be a good boy," said the Chouette, repressing
her anger, "and I'll give you something."

"Well, what?" said Tortillard, coming up to her. "Speak to me so always,
and I'll do anything you wish me, Mother Chouette."

"Come, come, I'm in a hurry!"

"Yes; but promise me that I may have some fun with the Schoolmaster."

"Another time; I haven't time to-day."

"Only a little bit,--just let me tease him for five minutes?"

"Another time; I tell you that I want to return up-stairs as quickly as
possible."

"Why, then, do you want to open the door of his apartment?"

"That's no affair of yours. Come, now, have done with this. Perhaps the
Martials are come by this time, and I must have some talk with them. So
be a good boy, and you sha'n't be sorry for it. Come along."

"I must love you very much, Chouette, for you make me do just what you
like," said Tortillard, slowly advancing.

The dim, wavering light of the candle, which but imperfectly lighted
this gloomy way, reflected the black profile of this hideous brat on the
slimy walls, which were full of crevices and reeking with damp. At the
end of this passage, through the half obscurity, might be seen the low
and crumbling arch of the entrance to the cellar, the thick door
strengthened with iron bars, and, standing out in the shade, the red
shawl and white cap of the Chouette.

By the united exertions of the two, the door opened harshly on its rusty
hinges; a puff of humid vapour escaped from this den, as dark as
midnight. The light, placed on the ground, threw its faint beams on the
first steps of the stone staircase, the bottom of which was completely
lost in the darkness. A cry, or, rather, a savage roar, came from the
depths of the cave.

"Ah, there's _fourline_ wishing his mamma good-morning!" said the
Chouette, with a sneer.

And she descended several steps, in order to conceal her basket in some
hole.

"I'm hungry!" exclaimed the Schoolmaster, in a voice that shook with
rage; "do you wish to kill me like a mad dog?"

"What's the deary lovey hungry?" said the Chouette, with a laugh of
mockery; "then smell its thumb."

There was a sound like that of a chain twisted violently; then a groan
of mute, repressed passion.

"Take care! Take care, or you'll have a bump in your leg, as you had at
Bouqueval farm, poor dear pa!" said Tortillard.

"He's right, the boy is,--keep yourself quiet, _fourline_," continued
the hag; "the ring and chain are solid, old No-Eyes, for they came from
Father Micou's, and he sells nothing but the best goods. It is your
fault, too; why did you allow yourself to be bound whilst you were
asleep? We only had then to put the ring and chain in this place, and
bring you down here in the cool to preserve you, old darling."

"That's a pity! He'll grow mouldy," said Tortillard.

Again the clank of the chain was heard.

"He, he, _fourline_! Why, he's dancing like a cockchafer tied by the
claw," said the beldame, "I think I see him!"

"Cockchafer, cockchafer, fly away home! Fly, fly, fly! Your husband is
the Schoolmaster!" sung Tortillard.

This increased the Chouette's hilarity. Having deposited her basket in a
hole formed by the lowering of the wall of the staircase, she stood
erect, and said:

"You see, _fourline_--"

"He don't see," said Tortillard.

"The brat's right. Will you hear, _fourline_? There was no occasion,
when we came away from the farm, to be such a booby as to turn
compassionate, and prevent me from marking Pegriotte's face with my
vitriol; and then, too, you talked of your conscience, which was getting
troubled. I saw you were growing lily-livered, and meant to come the
'honest dodge;' and so, some of these odd-come-shortlies, you would have
turned 'nose' (informer), and have 'made a meal' of us, old No-Eyes; and
then--"

"Then old No-Eyes will make a meal of you, for he is hungry, Chouette,"
said Tortillard, suddenly, and with all his strength pushing the old
woman by her back.

The Chouette fell forward with a horrible imprecation. She might have
been distinctly heard as she rolled from the top to the bottom of the
staircase.

"Bump, bump, bump, bump! There's the Chouette for you--there she is! Why
don't you jump upon her, old buffer?" added Tortillard.

Then, seizing the basket from under the stone where he had seen the old
woman place it, he scampered up the stairs, exclaiming, with a shout of
savage joy:

"Here's a pull worth more than that you had before,--eh, Chouette? This
time you won't bite me till the blood comes,--eh? Ah, you thought I bore
no spite--much obliged--my cheek bleeds still!"

"Oh, I have her! I have her!" cried the Schoolmaster, from the depth of
the cave.

"If you have her, old lad, I cry snacks," said Tortillard, with a laugh.

And he stopped on the top step of the stairs.

"Help!" shrieked the Chouette, in a strangling voice.

"Thanks, Tortillard!" said the Schoolmaster, "thanks. And, to reward
you, you shall hear the night-bird (Chouette) shriek! Listen,
boy,--listen to the bird of death!"

"Bravo! Here I am in the dress-boxes!" said Tortillard, seating himself
on the top of the stairs.

As he said this, he raised the light to endeavour to see the fearful
scene which was going on in the depths of the cavern; but the darkness
was too thick, so faint a light could not disperse it: Bras-Rouge's son
could not see anything. The struggle with the Schoolmaster and the
Chouette was mute, deadly, without a word, without a cry; only from time
to time was heard the hard breathing, or the stifled groan, which always
accompanies violent and desperate efforts. Tortillard, seated on the
step, began to stamp his feet with that cadence peculiar to an audience
impatient to see the beginning of a play; then he uttered the cry so
familiar to the frequenters of the gallery of the minor theatres:

"Music! Music! Play up! Up with the curtain!"

"Oh, now I have hold of you, as I desired," murmured the Schoolmaster,
from the recess of the cellar; "and you were going--"

A desperate movement of the Chouette interrupted him; she struggled with
all the energy which the fear of death inspires.

"Louder! Can't hear!" bawled Tortillard.

"It is in vain you try to gnaw my hand, I will hold you as I like," said
the Schoolmaster. Then, having, no doubt, succeeded in keeping the
Chouette down, he added, "That's it! Now listen--"

"Tortillard, call your father!" shrieked the Chouette, with a faltering,
exhausted voice. "Help! Help!"

"Turn her out, the old thing! She won't let us hear," said the little
cripple, with a shout of laughter; "put her out!"

The Chouette's cries were not audible from this cavern, low as it was.
The wretched creature, seeing that there was no chance of help from
Bras-Rouge's son, resolved to try a last effort.

"Tortillard, go and fetch help, and I will give you my basket; it is
full of jewels. There it is, under a stone."

"How generous! Thank ye, madame. Why, haven't I got it already? Hark!
Don't you hear how it rattles?" said Tortillard, shaking it. "But now,
if you'll give us half a pound of gingerbread nuts, I'll go and fetch
pa."

"Have pity on me, and I will--"

The Chouette was unable to conclude. Again there was a profound silence.
The little cripple again began to beat time on the stone staircase on
which he was seated, accompanying the noise of his feet with the
repeated cry:

"Why don't you begin? Up with the curtain! Music! Music!"

"In this way, Chouette, you can no longer disturb me with your cries,"
said the Schoolmaster, after a few minutes, during which he had, no
doubt, gagged the old woman. "You know very well," he continued, in a
slow, hollow voice, "that I do not wish to end this all at once; torture
for torture! You have made me suffer enough, and I must speak at length
to you before I kill you,--yes, at length. It will be very terrible for
you, agonising!"

"Come, no stuff and nonsense, old parson," said Tortillard, raising
himself half up from his seat; "punish her, but don't do her any harm.
You say you'll kill her,--that's only a hum; I am very fond of my
Chouette; I have only lent her to you, and you must give her back again.
Don't spoil her,--I won't have my Chouette spoiled,--if you do, I'll go
and fetch pa!"

"Be quiet, and she shall only have what she deserves, a profitable
lesson," said the Schoolmaster, in order to assure Tortillard, and for
fear the cripple should go and fetch assistance.

"All right! Bravo! Now the play's going to begin!" said Bras-Rouge's
son, who did not seriously believe that the Schoolmaster intended to
kill the Chouette.

"Let us discourse a little, Chouette," continued the Schoolmaster, in a
calm voice. "In the first place, you see, since that dream at the
Bouqueval farm, which brought all my crimes before my eyes, since that
dream, which did all but drive me mad,--which will drive me mad, for, in
my solitude, in the deep isolation in which I live, all my thoughts
dwell on this dream, in spite of myself,--a strange change has come over
me; yes, I have a horror of my past ferocity. In the first place, I
would not allow you to make a martyr of La Goualeuse, though that was
nothing. Chaining me here in the cellar, making me suffer from cold and
hunger, and detaining me for your wicked suggestions, you have left me
to all the fear of my own reflections. Oh, you do not know what it is to
be left alone,--always alone,--with a dark veil over your eyes, as the
pitiless man said who punished me. Oh, it is horrid! It was in this very
cavern that I flung him, in order to kill him; and this cavern is the
place of my punishment, it may be my grave. I repeat that this is
horrid! All that that man predicted to me has come to pass; he said to
me, 'You have abused your strength,--you will be the plaything, the
sport of the most weak.' And it has been so. He said to me,
'Henceforward separated from the exterior world, face to face with the
eternal remembrance of your crimes, one day you will repent those
crimes.' And that day has come; the loneliness has purified me; I could
not have believed it possible. Another proof that I am perhaps less
wicked than formerly, is that I feel inexpressible joy in holding you
here, monster! Not to avenge myself, but to avenge your victims,--yes, I
shall have accomplished a duty when, with my own hands, I shall have
punished my accomplice. A voice says to me, that, if you had fallen into
my power earlier, much blood, much blood would have been spared. I have
now a horror of my past murders; and yet, is it not strange? It is
without fear, it is even with security, that I am now about to
perpetrate on you a fearful murder, with most fearful refinements. Say,
say! Do you understand that?"

"Bravo! Well played, old No-Eyes! He gets on," exclaimed Tortillard,
applauding. "It is really something to laugh at."

"To laugh at?" continued the Schoolmaster, in a hollow voice. "Keep
still, Chouette; I must complete my explanation as to how I gradually
came to repentance. This revelation will be hateful to you, heart of
stone, and will prove to you also how remorseless I ought to be in the
vengeance which I should wreak on you in the name of our victims. I must
be quick. My delight at grasping you thus makes my blood throb in my
veins,--my temples beat with violence, just as when, by thinking of my
dream, my reason wanders. Perhaps one of my crises will come on; but I
shall have time to make the approaches of death frightful to you by
compelling you to hear me."

"At him, Chouette!" cried Tortillard. "At him! And reply boldly! Why,
you don't know your part. Tell the 'old one' to prompt you, my worthy
elderly damsel."

"It is useless for you to struggle and bite me," said the Schoolmaster,
after another pause. "You shall not escape me,--you have bitten my
fingers to the bone; but I will pull your tongue out, if you stir. Let
us continue our discourse. When I have been alone--alone in the night
and silence--I have begun to experience fits of furious, impotent rage;
and, for the first time, my senses wandered. Oh! though I was awake, I
again dreamed the dream--you know--the dream. The little old man in the
Rue du Roule, the drowned woman, the cattle-dealer, and you--soaring
over these phantoms! I tell you it was horrible! I am blind, and my
thoughts assume a form, a body, in order to represent to me incessantly,
and in a visible, palpable manner, the features of my victims. I should
not have dreamed this fearful vision, had not my mind, continually
absorbed by the remembrance of my past crimes, been troubled with the
same fantasies. Unquestionably, when one is deprived of sight, the ideas
that beset us form themselves into images in the brain. Yet sometimes,
by dint of viewing them with resigned terror, it would appear that these
menacing spectres have pity on me,--they grow dim--fade away--vanish.
Then I feel myself awakened from my horrid dream, but so weak--cast
down--prostrated--that--would you believe it? ah, how you will laugh,
Chouette!--that I weep! Do you hear? I weep! You don't laugh? Laugh!
Laugh! Laugh, I say!"

The Chouette gave a dull and stifled groan.

"Louder," said Tortillard; "can't hear."

"Yes," continued the Schoolmaster, "I weep, for I suffer and rage in
vain. I say to myself, 'To-morrow, next day, for ever, I shall be a prey
to the same attacks of delirium and gloomy desolation. 'What a life! Oh,
what a life! And I would not choose death rather than be buried alive
in this abyss which incessantly pervades my thoughts! Blind, alone, and
a prisoner,--what can relieve me from my remorse? Nothing, nothing! When
the fantasies disappear for a moment, and do not pass and repass the
black veil constantly before my eyes, there are other tortures,--other
overwhelming reflections. I say to myself, 'If I had remained an honest
man, I should be at this moment free, tranquil, happy, beloved, and
honoured by my connections, instead of being blind and chained in this
dungeon at the mercy of my accomplices.' Alas! the regret of happiness
lost from crime is the first step towards repentance; and when to
repentance is joined an expiation of fearful severity,--an expiation
which changes life into a long, sleepless night, filled with avenging
hallucinations or despairing reflections,--perhaps then man's pardon
succeeds to remorse and expiation."

"I say, old chap," exclaimed Tortillard, "you are borrowing a bit from
M. Moissard's part! Come, no cribbing--gammon!"

The Schoolmaster did not hear Bras-Rouge's son.

"You are astonished to hear me speak thus, Chouette? If I had continued
to imbrue myself either in bloody crimes or the fierce drunkenness of
the life of the galleys, this salutary change would never have come over
me I know full well. But alone, blind, stung with remorse, which eats
into me, of what else could I think? Of new crimes,--how to commit them?
Escape,--how to escape? And, if I escaped, whither should I go? What
should I do with my liberty? No; I must henceforth live in eternal
night, between the anguish of repentance and the fear of formidable
apparitions which pursue me. Sometimes, however, a faint ray of hope
comes to lighten the depth of my darkness, a moment of calm succeeds to
my torments,--yes, for sometimes I am able to drive away the spectres
which beset me by opposing to them the recollections of an honest and
peaceable past, by ascending in thought to my youthful days, to my hours
of infancy. Happily, the greatest wretches have, at least, some years of
peace and innocence to oppose to their criminal and blood-stained years.
None are born wicked; the most infamous have had the lovely candour of
infancy,--have tasted the sweet joys of that delightful age. And thus, I
again say, I sometimes find a bitter consolation in saying to myself, 'I
am, at this hour, doomed to universal execration, but there was a time
when I was beloved, protected, because I was inoffensive and good. Alas!
I must, indeed, take refuge in the past, when I can, for it is there
only that I can find calm.'"

As he uttered these last words, the tones of the Schoolmaster lost their
harshness; this man of iron appeared deeply moved, and he added:

"But now the salutary influence of these thoughts is such that my fury
is appeased; courage, power will fail me to punish you. No, it is not I
who will shed your blood."

"Well said, old buck! So, you see, Chouette, it was only a lark," cried
Tortillard, applauding.

"No, it is not I who will shed your blood," continued the Schoolmaster;
"it would be a murder, excusable perhaps, but still a murder; and I have
enough with three spectres; and then--who knows?--perhaps one day you
will repent also?"

And, as he spake thus, the Schoolmaster had mechanically given the
Chouette some liberty of movement. She took advantage of it to seize the
stiletto which she had thrust into her stays after Sarah's murder, and
aimed a violent blow with this weapon at the ruffian, in order to
disengage herself from him. He uttered a cry of extreme pain.

The ferocity of his hatred, his vengeance, his rage, his bloody
instincts, suddenly aroused and exasperated by this attack, now all
burst forth suddenly, terribly, and carried with it his reason, already
so strongly shaken by so many shocks.

"Ah, viper, I feel your teeth!" he exclaimed in a voice that shook with
passion, and seizing, with all his might, the Chouette, who had thought
thus to escape him. "You are in this dungeon, then?" he added, with an
air of madness. "But I will crush the viper or screech-owl. No doubt you
were waiting for the coming of the phantoms. Yes; for the blood beats in
my temples,--? my ears ring,--my head turns--as when they are about to
appear! Yes; I was not deceived; here they are,--they advance from the
depths of darkness,--they advance! How pale they are; and their blood,
how it flows,--red and smoking! It frightens you,--you struggle. Well,
be still, you shall not see the phantoms,--no, you shall not see them. I
have pity on you; I will make you blind. You shall be, like
me,--eyeless!"

Here the Schoolmaster paused. The Chouette uttered a cry so horrible
that Tortillard, alarmed, bounded off the step, and stood up. The horrid
shrieks of the Chouette served to place the copestone on the fury of the
Schoolmaster.

"Sing," he said, in a low voice, "sing, Chouette,--night-bird! Sing your
song of death! You are happy; you do not see three phantoms of those we
have assassinated,--the little old man in the Rue du Roule, the drowned
woman, the cattle-dealer. I see them; they approach; they touch me. Ah,
so cold,--so cold! Ah!"

The last gleam of sense of this unhappy wretch was lost in this cry of
condemnation. He could no longer reason, but acted and roared like a
wild beast, and only obeyed the savage instinct of destruction for
destruction. A hurried trampling was now heard, interrupted frequently
at intervals with a heavy sound, which appeared like a box of bones
bounding against a stone, upon which it was intended to be broken.
Sharp, convulsive shrieks, and a burst of hellish laughter accompanied
each of these blows. Then there was a gasp of agony. Then--nothing.

Suddenly a distant noise of steps and voices reached the depths of the
subterranean vault. Tortillard, frozen with terror by the fearful scene
at which he had been present without seeing it, perceived several
persons holding lights, who descended the staircase rapidly. In a moment
the cave was full of agents of safety, led by Narcisse Borel. The
Municipal Guards followed. Tortillard was seized on the first steps of
the cellar, with the Chouette's basket still in his hand.

Narcisse Borel, with some of his men, descended into the Schoolmaster's
cavern. They all paused, struck by the appalling sight. Chained by the
leg to an enormous stone placed in the middle of the cave, the
Schoolmaster, with his hair on end, his long beard, foaming mouth, was
moving like a wild beast about his den, drawing after him by the two
legs the dead carcase of the Chouette, whose head was horribly
fractured. It required desperate exertions to snatch her from his grasp
and manacle him. After a determined resistance they at length conveyed
him into the low parlour of the cabaret, a large dark room, lighted by a
solitary window. There, handcuffed and guarded, were Barbillon, Nicholas
Martial, his mother and sister. They had been apprehended at the very
moment when laying violent hands on the jewel-matcher to cut her throat.
She was recovering herself in another room. Stretched on the ground, and
hardly restrained by two men, the Schoolmaster, slightly wounded, but
quite deranged, was roaring like a wild bull.

Barbillon, with his head hanging down, his face ghastly, lead-coloured,
his lips colourless, eye fixed and savage, his long and straight hair
falling on the collar of his blouse, torn in the struggle, was seated
on a bench, his wrists, enclosed in handcuffs, resting on his knees. The
juvenile appearance of this fellow (he was scarcely eighteen years of
age), the regularity of his beardless features, already emaciated and
withered, were rendered still more deplorable by the hideous stamp which
debauchery and crime had imprinted on his physiognomy. Impassive, he did
not say a word. It could not be determined whether this apparent
insensibility was owing to stupor or to a calm energy; his breathing was
rapid, and, at times, he wiped away the perspiration from his pale brow
with his fettered hands.

By his side was Calabash, whose cap had been torn off, and her yellowish
hair, tied behind with a piece of tape, hung down in several scanty and
tangled meshes. More savage than subdued, her thin and bilious cheeks
were somewhat suffused, as she looked disdainfully at her brother,
Nicholas, who was in a chair in front of her. Anticipating the fate that
awaited him, this scoundrel was dejected. With drooping head and
trembling knees he was overcome with fright; his teeth chattered
convulsively, and he heaved heavy groans.

The Mother Martial, the only one unmoved, exhibited every proof that she
had lost nothing of her accustomed audacity. With head erect, she looked
unshrinkingly around her. However, at the sight of Bras-Rouge,--whom
they brought into the low room, after having made him accompany the
commissary and his clerk in the minute search they had made all over the
place,--the widow's features contracted, in spite of herself, and her
small and usually dull eyes lighted up like those of an infuriated
viper; her pinched-up lips became livid, and she twisted her manacled
arms. Then, as if sorry she had made this mute display of impotent rage,
she subdued her emotion, and became cold and calm again.

Whilst the commissary and his clerk were writing their depositions,
Narcisse Borel, rubbing his hands, cast a satisfied look on the
important capture he had made, and which freed Paris from a band of
dangerous criminals; but, confessing to himself how useful Bras-Rouge
had really been in the affair, he could not help casting on him an
expressive and grateful look.

Tortillard's father was to share until after trial the confinement and
lot of those he had informed against, and, like them, he was handcuffed;
and even more than them did he assume a trembling air of consternation,
twisting his weasel's features with all his might, in order to give them
a despairing expression, and heaving tremendous sighs. He embraced
Tortillard, as if he should find some consolation in his paternal
caresses.

The little cripple did not seem much moved by these marks of tenderness;
he had just learned that, for a time, he would be moved off to the
prison for young offenders.

"What a misery to have a dear child!" cried Bras-Rouge, pretending to be
greatly affected. "It is we two who are most unfortunate, madame, for we
shall be separated from our children."

The widow could no longer preserve her calmness; and having no doubt of
Bras-Rouge's treachery, which she had foretold, she exclaimed:

"I was sure it was you who had sold my son at Toulon. There, Judas!" and
she spat in his face. "You sell our heads! Well, they shall see the
right sort of deaths,--deaths of true Martials!"

"Yes; we shan't shrink before the carline (guillotine)," added Calabash,
with savage excitement.

The widow, glancing towards Nicholas, said to her daughter, with an air
of unutterable contempt:

"That coward there will dishonour us on the scaffold!"

Some minutes afterwards the widow and Calabash, accompanied by two
policemen, got into a hackney-coach to go to St. Lazare; Barbillon,
Nicholas, and Bras Rouge were conveyed to La Force, whilst the
Schoolmaster was conveyed to the Conciergerie, where there are cells for
the reception of lunatics.


END OF VOLUME IV.


       *       *       *       *       *
Transcriber's Notes:


This e-text was prepared from numbered edition 505 of the 1000 printed.

Minor punctuation and capitalization corrections have been made without
comment.

Minor typographical errors of single words, otherwise spelled correctly
throughout the text have been made without comment.

p. 87, "that'll" to "that" (that I'll slash your eyes out;)

p. 188, "caligraphy" to "calligraphy" (expert in calligraphy)

Word Variations appearing in the original text which have been retained:

"Bras Rouge" (10) and "Bras-Rouge" (49)
"Halloa" (3) and "Holloa" (3) and "Holla" (1)
"Ile du Ravageur" (2) and "Isle du Ravageur" (13)
"rencontre" (1) and "rencounter" (1)
"work-people" (1) and "workpeople" (1)

Words using the [oe] ligature, which have been here represented as "oe":
"manoeuvre".

Throughout the text, illustrations and their captions were placed on
facing pages. For the purpose of this e-text these pages have been
combined into one entry.

Footnotes, originally at the bottom of a printed page, have been placed
directly below the paragraph in which their anchor symbol appears.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Mysteries of Paris, Volume 4 of 6, by 
Eugène Sue

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MYSTERIES OF PARIS, V.4 ***

***** This file should be named 33803-8.txt or 33803-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/3/8/0/33803/

Produced by David Edwards, Christine Aldridge and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
(Stanford University, SUL Books in the Public Domain)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

Project Gutenberg's The Mysteries of Paris, Volume 5 of 6, by Eugène Sue

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Mysteries of Paris, Volume 5 of 6

Author: Eugène Sue

Illustrators: G. Mercier
              Bicknell
              Léon Poiteau
              Adrian Marcel

Release Date: September 22, 2010 [EBook #33804]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MYSTERIES OF PARIS, V.5 ***




Produced by David Edwards, Christine Aldridge and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
(Stanford University, SUL Books in the Public Domain)





Transcriber's Notes:

1. Passages in italics are surrounded by _underscores_.

2. Passages in Gothic Bold are surrounded by +plus+ signs.

3. Other transcription notes appear at the end of this e-text.




[Illustration: "_'Cecily! Cecily!' Murmured a Voice_"
Original Etching by Adrian Marcel]




+The Mysteries of Paris.+

  _ILLUSTRATED WITH ETCHINGS
  BY MERCIER, BICKNELL, POITEAU,
  AND ADRIAN MARCEL._

                 _BY EUGENE SUE_


      _IN SIX VOLUMES
          VOLUME V._


       _PRINTED FOR
  FRANCIS A. NICCOLLS & CO.
          BOSTON_


     +Edition de Luxe+

_This edition is limited to one thousand copies,
of which this is_

         No.______




CONTENTS.


      CHAP.                                               PAGE
         I. THE PRESENTATION                                11
        II. MURPHY AND POLIDORI                             35
       III. THE CLERK'S OFFICE                              57
        IV. AVOID TEMPTATION                                69
         V. LA FORCE                                        99
        VI. PIQUE-VINAIGRE                                 114
       VII. MAÎTRE BOULARD                                 139
      VIII. FRANÇOIS GERMAIN                               148
        IX. THE LIONS' DEN                                 169
         X. THE STORY-TELLER                               193
        XI. GRINGALET AND CUT-IN-HALF                      211




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.

                                                          PAGE
      "'CECILY! CECILY!' MURMURED A VOICE"      _Frontispiece_
      "SLOWLY DANCING AND WHIRLING AROUND ME"               26
      "THEN LEFT ME"                                       126
      "TOUCHED WITH HIS LIPS THROUGH THE GRATING"          167
      "THE SKELETON STAGGERED AT FIRST"                    243




THE MYSTERIES OF PARIS.




CHAPTER I.

THE PRESENTATION.


A few days after the murder of Madame Séraphin, the death of the
Chouette, and the arrest of the gang of desperadoes taken by surprise at
Bras-Rouge's house, Rodolph paid another visit to the house in the Rue
du Temple.

We have already observed that, with the view of practising artifice for
artifice with Jacques Ferrand, discovering his hidden crimes, obliging
him to repair them, and inflicting condign punishment should the guilty
wretch, either by skill or hypocrisy, continue to evade the just
punishment of the laws, Rodolph had sent to fetch from one of the
prisons in Germany a young and beautiful creole, the unworthy wife of
the negro David. This female, lovely in person as depraved in mind, as
fascinating as dangerous, had reached Paris the preceding evening, and
had received the most minute instructions from Baron de Graün.

The reader will recollect that in the last interview between Rodolph and
Madame Pipelet, the latter having very cleverly managed to propose
Cecily to Madame Séraphin, as a servant to the notary in place of Louise
Morel, her proposition had been so well received that the _femme de
charge_ had promised to speak to Jacques Ferrand on the subject; and
this she had done, in terms most flattering to Cecily, the very morning
of the day on which she (Madame Séraphin) had been drowned at the Isle
du Ravageur.

The motive for Rodolph's visit was, therefore, to inquire the result of
Cecily's introduction. To his great astonishment, he found, on entering
the lodge, that although eleven o'clock in the morning had struck by all
the neighbouring dials, Pipelet had not yet risen, while Anastasie was
standing beside his bed, offering him some sort of drink.

As Alfred, whose forehead and eyes were entirely concealed beneath his
huge cotton nightcap, did not reply to his wife's inquiries, she
concluded he slept, and therefore closed the curtains of his bed.
Turning around, she perceived Rodolph, and, as usual, gave him a
military salute, by lifting the back of her left hand up to her wig.

"Ah, my king of lodgers! Service to you! How are you? As for me, I'm
upset--bewildered--stupefied. Pretty doings have there been in the house
since you was here. And my poor Alfred,--obliged to keep his bed ever
since yesterday!"

"Why, what has happened?"

"Positively, don't you guess? Still going on in the old way with that
monster of a painter, who is more bitter than ever against Alfred. He
has quite muddled his brains, till I declare I don't know what to do
with him."

"Cabrion again?"

"Oh, _he'll_ never leave off."

"He must be the very devil!"

"Really, M. Rodolph, I shall very soon think so; for he always knows the
very instant I quit the house. Scarcely is my back turned, than there he
is, in the twinkling of an eye, worrying and tormenting my poor old dear
of a husband, who is as helpless and frightened as a babby. Only last
night, when I had just stepped out as far as M. Ferrand's the
notary's--Ah, there's pretty work there, too!"

"But Cecily?" said Rodolph, with some little impatience. "I called to
know--"

"Hold hard, my king of lodgers! Don't be in such a hurry, or you'll put
me out. And I've such a deal to tell you, I don't know when I shall have
done; and if once I'm interrupted in a story, I never know when to begin
again."

"There now, go on as fast as you can; I'm listening."

"Well, then, first and foremost, what do you think has happened in the
house? Ah, you'll never guess, so I'll tell you. Only imagine, old
Mother Burette's being taken up!"

"What, the female pawnbroker?"

"Oh, Lord, she seems to have had a curious mixture of trades: for
besides being a money-lender, she was a receiver of stolen goods, a
melter of gold and silver, a fortune-teller, a cheat, a dealer in
second-hand clothes, and any sort of contraband articles. The worst of
the story is that M. Bras-Rouge, her old sweetheart and our principal
lodger, is also arrested. I tell you the house is thoroughly upset with
these strange doings."

"Arrested! Bras-Rouge arrested?"

"That he was, I can promise you. Why, even his mischievous little imp of
a son--the lame boy we call Tortillard--has also been locked up. They
say that lots of murders have been planned and managed at his house,
which was the well-known resort of a gang of ruffians; that the
Chouette, one of Mother Burette's most particular friends, has been
strangled; and that, if assistance had not arrived in time, Mother
Mathieu, the dealer in precious stones for whom Morel worked, would also
have been murdered. Come, I think there's a pretty penn'orth of news for
you,--and cheap, too, at the price!"

"Bras-Rouge arrested and the Chouette dead!" murmured Rodolph to
himself, in deep astonishment at the tidings. "Well, the vile old hag
deserved her fate, and poor Fleur-de-Marie is at least avenged!"

"So that is the state of things here," continued Anastasie. "As for M.
Cabrion and his devil's tricks, I'll tell you all about it. Oh, you
never knew such a bold howdacious willin as he is! But you shall
hear,--I'll go straight on with my story. But there never,--no, there
never was his feller for inperence! So when Mother Burette was took up,
and we heard how that M. Bras-Rouge, our principal lodger, was quodded
also, I says to my old boy, 'Alfred, darling,' says I, 'you must toddle
off to the landlord and let him know as M. Bras-Rouge is in the stone
jug.' Well, Alfred goes; but in about two hours' time back he comes--in
such a state!--such a state! White as a sheet and puffing like an ox!"

"Why, what was the matter?"

"I'm a-going to tell you. I suppose, M. Rodolph, you recollect the high
wall about ten steps from here? Well, my poor, dear, darling husband was
going along thinking of nothing, when, quite by chance, he just looked
upon this wall. And what do you think he saw written in great staring
letters with a piece of charcoal?--why, 'Pipelet and Cabrion!'--the two
names joined together by a sort of true-lover's knot. (Ah, it is that
true-lover's knot which sticks so tight in the gizzard of my poor old
chick!) That sight rather upset him; but still he tried to act like a
man and not mind it. So on he went. But hardly had he proceeded ten
steps farther when, on the principal entrance to the Temple, there again
were the same hateful words, 'Pipelet and Cabrion,' united as before!
Still he walked on; but at every turn he saw the same detestable writing
on the walls, doors, and even shutters of houses! Everywhere Pipelet
and Cabrion danced before his eyes, for ever bound in the same tender
tie of love or friendship! My poor dear Alfred's head began to turn
around, and his eyes to grow dizzy; all sorts of horrid objects seemed
to meet him and laugh him to scorn. He fancied the very people in the
streets were laughing at him. So, quite confused and ashamed, he pulled
his hat over his face, and took the road towards the Boulevards,
believing that the scamp Cabrion would have confined his abominations to
the Rue du Temple. But no--not he! All along the Boulevards, wherever a
blank spot remained or a place could be found to hold the words, had he
written 'Pipelet and Cabrion!'--sometimes adding, 'till death!' At last
my poor dear man arrived at the house of the landlord, but so bewildered
and stupefied that, after hammering and stammering and bodgering about
without being able to utter a clear sentence, the landlord, having tried
for nearly half an hour to bring him sufficiently to his senses to say
what had made him come to his house, got quite in a passion, and called
him a stupid old fool, and told him to go home and send his wife or
somebody who could speak common sense. Well, poor dear Alfred left as he
was ordered, thinking, at any rate, he would return by a different road,
so as to escape those dreadful words that had so overcome him going. Do
you believe he could get rid of them, though? No; there they were, large
as life, scrawled upon every place, and united by the lover's band as
before."

"What, Pipelet and Cabrion still written along the walls?"

"Precisely so, my king of lodgers. The end of it was that my poor
darling came home to me regularly brain-struck, talked in the wildest
and most desperate way of leaving France, exiling himself for ever, and
no one knows what. Well, I persuaded him to tell me all that had
happened; then I did my best to quiet him, and persuade him not to
worry himself about such a beggar as that Cabrion; and when I found he
had grown a little calmer, I left him, and went to take Cecily to the
notary's, before I proceeded on to the landlord to finish poor Alfred's
message. Now, perhaps, you think I've done? But I haven't, though. No; I
had hardly quitted the place, than that abominable Cabrion, who must
have watched me out, sent a couple of impudent great creatures, who
pursued Alfred with the most determined villainy. Oh, bless you, it
makes my very hair stand on end when I think of it! I'll tell you all
about their proceedings another time; let me first finish about the
notary. Well, off I started with Cecily in a hackney-coach,--as you told
me to do, you know. She was dressed in her pretty costume of a German
peasant; for having only just arrived, she had not had time to procure
any other, which I was to explain to M. Ferrand, and beg of him to
excuse. You may believe me or not, just as you please, my king of
lodgers, but though I have seen some pretty girls in my time,--myself,
for instance,--yet I never saw one (not even myself) comparable to
Cecily. And then she has such a way of using those wicked black eyes of
hers! She throws into them a look--a look--that seems--to mean--I know
not what--only they seem to pierce you through, and make you feel so
strange; I never saw such eyes in my life! Why, there's my poor, dear,
darling Alfred, whose virtue has never been suspected; well, the first
time that she fixed her looks on him, the dear fellow turned as red as a
carrot, and nothing in the world could have induced him to gaze in her
face a second time. I'm sure for more than an hour afterwards he kept
fidgeting about in his chair, as though he were sitting upon nettles. He
told me afterwards he could not account for it, but that somehow the
look Cecily bestowed on him seemed to bring to his thoughts all the
dreadful stories that shameless Bradamanti used to tell about the female
savages, and which used to make my poor dear simpleton of an Alfred
blush to his very fingers' ends."

"But I want to hear what passed at the notary's. Never mind Alfred's
modesty just now, but tell me."

"I was just going, M. Rodolph. It was just seven o'clock in the evening
when we arrived at M. Ferrand's, and I told the porter to let his master
know that Madame Pipelet was there with the young woman she had spoke to
Madame Séraphin about, and by whose orders she had brought her. Upon
which the porter heaved a deep sigh, and asked me if I knew what had
happened to Madame Séraphin? I told him, 'No; I hadn't heard of anything
being the matter with her.' Ah, M. Rodolph, prepare for another strange
event,--a most astounding circumstance!"

"What can it be?"

"Why, Madame Séraphin was drowned while on a party of pleasure to which
she had gone with her relations."

"Drowned, and on a party of pleasure in the winter?" exclaimed Rodolph,
much surprised.

"Yes, drowned, M. Rodolph. For my part I must say that I was more
astonished than distressed at the news; for since that affair of poor
Louise, who was taken to prison entirely through her information, I
downright hated Madame Séraphin. So when I heard what had befallen her,
all I did was to say to myself, 'Oh, she's drowned, is she,--drowned?
Well, I don't mean to make myself ill with crying, that's very sure. I
sha'n't die of grief,--that's my disposition.'"

"And M. Ferrand?"

"The porter said at first he did not think I could see his master, and
begged me to wait in his lodge while he went to see. But he almost
directly came back to fetch me. We crossed the courtyard, and entered an
apartment on the ground floor, where a single miserable candle was
twinkling its best to light it, but without success. The notary was
sitting beside the fireplace, and on the hearth a few smouldering ashes
still sent out a small degree of warmth. But such a wretched hole I
never saw! It was my first view of M. Ferrand. Oh, my stars, what a
downright ugly fellow he is! Such a man as he might have offered to make
me Queen of Arabia before I would have played Alfred false."

"And tell me, did the notary appear much struck with Cecily when she
entered?"

"Why, how can any one tell what he thinks while he keeps those great
green spectacles on? Besides, a godly saint such as he passes for has no
business to know whether a woman is handsome or ugly. However, when we
both walked into the room and stood before him, he gave quite a spring
up from his seat. Most likely, he was astonished at Cecily's dress, for
she looked for all the world (only a hundred thousand times better) like
one of those 'buy-a-broom' girls with her short petticoats and her
handsome legs set off by her blue stockings with red clocks. My
conscience, what a leg she has! Such a slender ankle!--and then, oh,
such a calf! With a foot as small and delicate as an opera dancer's. I
can tell you that the notary seemed almost speechless with surprise,
after he had looked at her through his green specs from head to toe."

"Doubtless, as you say, he was struck by the whimsicality of Cecily's
costume."

"Well, maybe so; however, I felt that the critical moment had arrived,
and began to feel rather queer; fortunately, just as my courage began to
fail me, M. Rodolph, I recollected a maxim I learned from you, and that
got me safe through my difficulty."

"What maxim do you mean,--I don't remember teaching you any?"

"Don't you know?--'It is always enough for one to wish, for the other to
refuse; or, for one to desire, for the other to be unwilling.' 'So,'
said I to myself, 'here goes to rid my king of lodgers of his German
niece, and to burthen the hard-hearted master of poor Louise with her.
Now, then, for a good piece of shamming;' and, without giving the notary
breathing time, I began by saying, in a polite and insinuating tone, 'I
hope, sir, you'll excuse my niece being dressed as she is, but she has
only just arrived, and has brought nothing with her but the costume of
her country; and I am sure it don't lay in my power to provide her with
others; and, besides, it would not be worth while, since we have merely
called to thank you for having allowed Madame Séraphin to say you would
see Cecily, in consequence of the favourable character I had given her.
Still, sir, I don't think, after all, she would suit you.'"

"Capital, Madame Pipelet; go on."

"'And why so?' inquired the notary, who had established himself by the
warmest corner of the fire, and seemed to be looking very attentively at
us from over his green spectacles, 'why should you suppose your niece
not likely to suit me?' 'Because, sir, Cecily is already quite homesick;
she has only been here three days and yet she wants to go back; and so,
she says, she will, too, if she is obliged to beg her way, or sing songs
and sell little brooms, like the rest of her countrywomen.' 'But bless
me!' answered M. Ferrand, 'do you, who are her principal relation, mean
to allow of that?' 'I don't see how I am to hinder her, sir,' said I.
'Certainly, I am the nearest relation she has, for the poor thing is an
orphan, as I told good Madame Séraphin; but then she is twenty years of
age, and, of course, mistress of her own actions.' 'Stuff and nonsense!'
interrupted he, quite impatiently; 'don't tell me about being her own
mistress; at her time of life she is bound to obey her relations, and
take their advice in all things.' Upon which Cecily began to cry and to
creep up to me, all of a tremble, as if she was quite afraid of the
notary."

"And what said Jacques Ferrand further?"

"Oh, he kept muttering in a grumbling tone, 'A young creature at that
age left to her own guidance! Why, it would be the ruin of her! And, as
for begging her way back to Germany--a pretty idea! And you mean to call
yourself her aunt, and say that you would sanction such conduct?' 'All
right,' says I to myself; 'you are falling into the trap as neat as
ninepence, you miserly old hunks, and if I do not saddle you with
Cecily, my name is not what it is!' 'Yes,' cried I, in a discontented
voice, 'I'm her aunt, sure enough, and worse luck to me for having such
an encumbrance; I have difficulty enough to earn my bread, without
having a great overgrown girl like that, to take it out of my mouth; and
I would much rather she went back to her own country than stop here to
be a burthen to me. The deuce take people who can't manage to maintain
their own children, but just send them for others to work for and keep
without even so much as paying their travelling expenses!' And then, as
if Cecily were up to my schemes, and desirous of playing into my hands,
she burst out into such a fit of crying and sobbing as quite touched the
notary, who began in a sniffling, whining tone, as though preaching a
sermon, 'Let me tell you that you are accountable before Providence for
the charge he has entrusted to your care and keeping, and you are
answerable for any false step this poor girl may take. Now I am willing
to join you in a charitable action; and if your niece will promise me to
be honest, industrious, virtuous, pious, and, above all, never upon any
occasion to desire to leave the house, I will take pity on her, and
receive her into my service.' 'No, no!' said Cecily, crying more
violently than ever, 'I don't want to stop here with this gentleman; I
wish to go back to my home; and I will, too!'"

"Ah, ah," thought Rodolph, "her dangerous falsehood has not deserted
her,--the depraved creature has, evidently, fully comprehended the
instructions she received from Baron de Graün." Then, speaking aloud,
the prince continued, "Did Cecily's resistance appear to displease M.
Jacques Ferrand?"

"Yes, M. Rodolph, it seemed to make him as savage as could be, and he
muttered something between his teeth I could not make out. Then he said,
abruptly, 'It is not what you would prefer, young woman, but what is
most suitable and creditable that is to be considered. Providence will
never forsake you, so long as you conduct yourself respectably and
virtuously, and carefully attend to your religious duties. You will be
here in a family as pious as it is strict in all such matters; and if
your aunt has any real regard for your welfare, she will take advantage
of my offer. Your wages will be trifling at first, but hereafter I may
be induced to increase them should your good behaviour render you
deserving of encouragement.' 'Bravo!' thinks I to myself, 'I've
regularly hooked the miser, and fixed him with Cecily as right as a
trivet. Why, you old curmudgeon! You old skinflint! You miserable,
hard-hearted old hypocrite! You know very well that Séraphin was your
slave for years, and yet you seem to have forgotten her death, and the
dreadful manner of it, as much as though nothing had happened.' Then I
said out loud, 'No doubt, sir, yours is a very good place, and one as
many would be thankful to have, but if this girl is so homesick, what am
I to do?' 'Oh, take no notice of it,' replied the notary, 'and it will
soon wear away. But make up your minds,--just say one way or the other;
if you decide upon your niece entering my service, bring her here
to-morrow evening at the same hour you came to-night; and my porter will
show her about the premises, and also explain her work to her. As for
her wages, I shall begin with twenty francs a month and her food.' 'Oh,
sir, I hope you will make it twenty-five francs,--twenty is really too
little!' 'No, no, not at present; by and by perhaps I may, if I am
satisfied. One thing, however, I must impress upon you, and that is,
that your niece will never go beyond these walls, neither will she be
allowed to receive any visitors.' 'Bless your heart, sir! Who could come
to see her? Why, she does not know a single soul in Paris, except
myself, and I am obliged to stay at home to mind my lodge. I have been
terribly put about to come out this evening, so you will see nothing of
me; and as for my niece, she will be as great a stranger to me as though
she was in her own country; and the best way to prevent her going out
will be to make her wear the costume of her country,--she could not
venture in the streets dressed in that manner.' 'You are quite right,'
replied the notary; 'it is, besides, always respectable to wear the
dress of our own country; your niece shall, therefore, continue to dress
as she now is.' 'Come, my girl,' said I to Cecily, who, with her head
hanging down, and her finger in the corner of her mouth, was keeping up
a continual weeping, 'come, make up your mind. A good place with a
worthy master is not to be found every day; so, if you choose to refuse
it, do, but don't look to me for any further support; I'll have nothing
to do with you, I can tell you!' Upon which Cecily, swelling as though
her heart would burst, replied, sobbing, 'Very well, then, if aunt was
so particular, she should stay, but only on condition that, if she did
not find herself comfortable, she might come away at the end of a
fortnight.' 'Don't be alarmed,' answered the notary, 'I shall not force
you to stop against your will. I can promise you there are too many
young persons would be thankful to have my situation; but I pity your
position as an orphan, and, therefore, give you the preference. There,
take your earnest money; and let your aunt bring you here about this
time to-morrow evening.' Cecily was too busy crying to take the two
francs' piece the old starvemouse offered, so I took it for her. We made
our courtesies and came away."

"You have managed admirably, Madame Pipelet; and I do not forget my
promise; here is what I promised you, if you managed to get this girl
taken off my hands."

"Wait till to-morrow before you give it me, my king of lodgers!" cried
Madame Pipelet, putting back the money Rodolph offered her; "perhaps,
when I go to take Cecily this evening, M. Ferrand may have changed his
mind."

"Not he, depend upon it! But where is she?"

"In the small room adjoining the apartments of the commandant; she will
not stir out after the orders you gave. She seems mild and gentle as a
lamb; but then, her eyes! Oh, dear! It is difficult to fancy her either
one or the other, when one looks at those--Talking of the commandant,
what a plotting, mysterious person he is! Would you believe it? When he
came here to superintend the packing up of his furniture, he told me
that if any letters came addressed to 'Madame Vincent,' they were for
him, and that I was to send them to the Rue Mondine, No. 5. The idea of
the pretty creature having his letters addressed as if for a female!
What a conceited jackanapes he is! But the best of it was, he asked me
what had become of his wood! 'Your wood?' said I, 'why don't you ask
after your forest when you are about it?' Oh, I said it so flat and
plain! A mean, grasping hound, to trouble himself to ask after two
pitiful loads of wood,--his wood, indeed! 'What has become of your
wood?' repeated I, still working him on, till he got quite white with
passion, 'why, I burnt it to keep your things from the damp, which would
otherwise have made mushrooms grow upon your fine embroidered cap, and
the mildew from rotting your smart, glittering _robe de chambre_, which
you must love so dearly, because you have put it on so many times when
you were fool enough to wait for those who never meant to come, but were
only laughing at you,--like the lady who made believe she was going to
pay you a visit, and then passed your door, though you had set it wide
open to show yourself decked in all your finery. Your wood, indeed! I
like that! You poor squeeze-penny of a commandant,--enough to disgust
one with men altogether.'"

A deep, plaintive groan, something between a grunt and a sigh, from the
bed on which Alfred reposed, here interrupted Madame Pipelet.

"Ah, there's the old duck beginning to stir; he will not be long before
he wakes now. Will you excuse me, my king of lodgers?"

"Certainly; but I have yet some particulars to inquire of you."

"Oh, very well," answered Madame Pipelet. Then going up to her husband,
she drew back the curtains, saying, "How are you by this time, my old
chick? Look! there's M. Rodolph, who has heard all about this fresh
villainy of Cabrion's, and is as sorry about it as can be."

"Ah, M. Rodolph," murmured Alfred, languidly turning his head towards
the announced visitor, "this time the monster has struck at my heart; I
shall quit this bed no more. I am now the object of all the placards of
this vast city; my name is blazoned upon every wall in Paris, linked
with that of a wretch unworthy of mention. Yes, _môssieur_, there you
may see 'Pipelet and Cabrion,' bound together by an enormous band of
union. Yes, I--I--the injured Pipelet--united in bonds of seeming amity
and intimacy with that fellow Cabrion! Oh, _môssieur_, pity me! My name
joined with his in the eyes of all the dwellers of this great
capital,--the leading city of Europe!"

"Ah, M. Rodolph knows all about that; but he has yet to be told of your
yesterday's adventures with those two singular women, or whatever they
were."

"Alas, monsieur," sighed Alfred, in a mournful voice, "he reserved his
master-stroke of wickedness and fiendish malice till the last. This,
however, passes all bounds, and human patience can bear no more!"

"Come, my dear M. Pipelet, calm yourself, and endeavour to relate this
fresh annoyance to me."

"All that he has hitherto done to vex and insult me is as nothing
compared to his last malignant scheme to break my heart and ruin my
peace. But now the shameless monster has gone the full extent of
fiendish provocation. I know not whether I have the power of describing
to you the scene of last night; when I attempt to speak, shame,
confusion, and outraged modesty seem to deprive me of voice and breath."

M. Pipelet, having managed with some difficulty to raise himself in his
bed, modestly buttoned his flannel waistcoat up to his throat, and began
in the following terms:

"My wife had just gone out, absorbed in the bitter reflections arising
from the sight of my name so disgracefully prostituted on every wall in
Paris; I sought to while away my solitary hours by attending to the new
soling of a boot twenty times commenced and as often abandoned,--thanks
to the unceasing persecutions of my pitiless persecutor. Well, sir, I
was sitting at a table with the boot on my arm, though my thoughts were
far otherwise engaged, when I saw the lodge door open and a female
enter. The person who had just come in was wrapped in a large hooded
cloak, and, without thinking any harm, I civilly rose from my seat, and
put my hand to my hat. Then I observed another female, also attired in a
similar cloak, with a large hood, enter the lodge and shut the door
after her. Although somewhat astonished at the familiarity of such a
proceeding, and the silence maintained by both the women, I rose a
second time from my chair, and a second time I lifted my hand to my hat.
And then, sir,--but no, no, I can never finish the recital; my wounded
modesty chokes my utterance."

"Come, come, old pet," said Madame Pipelet, encouragingly, "get on with
your story; we are all men here."

"Well, then," stammered forth Alfred, his face becoming scarlet as the
fullest blown peony, "then their mantles fell to the ground. And what do
you think I saw? Why, a couple of sirens, or nymphs, or witches of one
kind or the other, with no sort of clothing except a petticoat made of
leaves, while a wreath of similar descriptions decorated their heads.
And then the two advanced towards me with outstretched arms, as though
inviting me to throw myself into them."

"Oh, the impudent sluts!" exclaimed Anastasie.

"Their impure advances disgusted me," continued Alfred, animated with a
chaste indignation; "and, in conformity with a habit which has ever
attended the most critical moments of my life, I remained still and
motionless on my chair. Then, profiting by my surprise and stupor, the
two sirens came gently forward to a sort of low music, turning and
twisting and extending their arms and legs in all directions. I became
petrified, as though changed to stone; I waited their approach in silent
agony. They came nearer and nearer, till at last they wrapped me tight
in their arms."

"Did they, though?" cried Anastasie. "Oh, the hussies! I only wish I had
been there with my broomstick; I'd have taught them how to come hopping
and skipping, and holding out their arms for an innocent, virtuous,
married man to tumble into,--I would, the bold-faced beggars!"

[Illustration: "_Slowly Dancing and Whirling around Me_"
Original Etching by Porteau]

"When I felt myself in a manner half stifled between them, I gave myself
up for lost. My blood retreated from my heart,--I felt as if struck with
death; when one of the sirens--a great, fair girl, and the boldest of
the two--leaned upon my shoulder, took off my hat, and, still slowly
dancing and whirling around me, left me bald-headed and defenceless.
Then the other one, accompanying the action with all sorts of attitudes
and singular dances, and waving of the arms, draws out a pair of
scissors she must have hid somewhere,--for I'm quite sure she had no
pockets,--came close behind me, and grasping with one hand all my
remaining hair, snipped it all off with one cut of her huge scissors;
yes, all,--every lock,--every hair I had to cover my poor old head;
dancing, and wheeling, and balancing, first on one foot, then on the
other, swaying out legs and arms in all sorts of stage-struck ways; then
joining voices, the pair of audacious spirits began singing, ''Tis for
Cabrion,--for Cabrion; we take your locks for Cabrion,--your dear friend
Cabrion!' Whilst the second voice repeated in a louder strain, 'Your
head is shorn for Cabrion,--for Cabrion, your friend!'"

After a pause, interrupted by repeated sighs and groans, Alfred resumed:

"During this impudent spoliation I once ventured to raise my eyes, and
then I saw flat against the windows of the lodge the detestable
countenance of Cabrion, with his large beard and pointed-crowned hat. He
was laughing, too,--laughing with all his might. Oh, how I shuddered at
the horrible vision! To escape from so harrowing a sight I closed my
eyes. When I opened them again all had disappeared, and I found myself
seated on my chair, bald-headed and completely disfigured for life. You
see, monsieur, that, by dint of obstinacy, impudence, and cunning,
Cabrion has at length effected his fell design. But by what fearful,
what diabolical means, has he succeeded! He wishes the world to believe
he is my accepted friend; began by sticking up a notice here in my
immediate neighbourhood to the effect that he and I had entered into a
treaty of friendship! Then, not content with so infamous an assertion,
he has caused my name, in conjunction with his own, to be displayed on
every wall in Paris, binding them together with an enormous band of
union, so that at this moment the whole of this vast capital is
impressed with the most perfect belief of my close intimacy with this
scoundrel. Then he desired locks of my hair, and he has every hair off
my head,--no doubt with the view, the guilty view, of exhibiting them as
proofs of our sworn friendship. Thanks to the merciless exaction of his
bold-faced dancing women, my last lock is stolen. So now, monsieur, you
see plainly there is nothing left for me but to quit France,--my lovely
and beloved France,--in whose dear bosom I had hoped to live and die!"

And with these pathetic words Alfred clasped his hands, closed his eyes,
and threw himself back upon his bed.

"Oh, nonsense, you old duck!" cried Anastasie. "On the contrary, now the
villain has gained his point and stolen your hair, he will let you alone
for the future. He has no further cause to disturb and torment you."

"Let me alone?" exclaimed M. Pipelet, with a convulsive spring upwards.
"Oh, you know him not; he is insatiable. True, he has got the hair he so
much desired to obtain; but who can say what he may further require of
me?"

The appearance of Rigolette at the entrance to the lodge put a stop to
the lamentations of M. Pipelet.

"Stay where you are, mademoiselle!" cried he, faithful to his habitual
chaste delicacy. "Pray don't think of coming in, for I am undressed and
in bed!" So saying, he covered himself up almost to his eyes, while
Rigolette, surprised and bewildered, remained at the threshold of the
door.

"Oh, my pretty neighbour," said Rodolph, pitying her confusion, "I was
just coming up to speak with you. Can you wait for me one minute?" Then
addressing Anastasie, he said, "Pray let nothing prevent your taking
Cecily to Jacques Ferrand's this evening."

"Make yourself perfectly easy, my king of lodgers; at seven o'clock
precisely she shall be duly placed there. Now that Morel's wife is able
to get about, I will ask her to mind the lodge for me while I am away;
for, bless you, Alfred would not stay by himself,--not for a 'varsal
crown!"

The bright freshness of Rigolette's complexion was daily fading away,
while her once round, dimpled cheek had sunk and given place to a pale,
careworn countenance, the usually gay, mirthful expression of which had
changed into a grave, thoughtful cast, more serious and mournful still
since her meeting with Fleur-de-Marie at the gate of St. Lazare.

"I am so glad to see you," said Rigolette to Rodolph, when they were at
a convenient distance from the lodge of Madame Pipelet. "I have so much
to say to you; I have, indeed."

"Well, then, first of all, tell me of yourself and your health. Let me
look at this pretty face, and see whether it is as gay and blooming as
usual. No, indeed. I declare you have grown quite pale and thin; I am
sure you work too hard."

"Oh, no, indeed, M. Rodolph, it is not that. On the contrary, my work
does me good; it hinders me from thinking too much, for I am obliged to
attend to what I am about. But it is grief, M. Rodolph, and nothing
else, that has altered me so much. And how can I help it? Every time I
see that poor Germain, I grieve more and more."

"He is still as desponding as ever, then?"

"Oh, worse than ever, M. Rodolph. And what is the most distressing is,
that, whatever I try to do to cheer him up, takes quite the contrary
effect; it seems as though a spell hung over me!" And here the large,
dark eyes of Rigolette were filled with tears.

"How do you know, my dear neighbour?"

"Why, only yesterday I went to see him, and to take him a book he was
desirous of having; it was a romance we read together when we lived
happily as near neighbours and dear friends. Well, directly he saw the
book, he burst into tears; but that did not astonish me,--it seemed
natural enough. Poor fellow! I dare say it brought back to his
recollection those happy evenings when he used to sit beside the fire in
my nice, pretty little room; while now he was in a horrid prison, the
companion of vile and wicked men, who only jeered at his melancholy.
Poor, dear Germain! It is very, very hard!"

"Take courage, my dear friend," said Rodolph. "When Germain quits his
prison, and his innocence is proved, he will find his mother and many
dear friends, in whose society, as well as in yours, he will soon forget
his present sufferings, as well as the hard trials he has undergone."

"That's all very pleasant when it arrives, but that won't stop his
tormenting himself till it does. But that is not all, neither."

"What other uneasiness has he?"

"Why, he being the only innocent man among all the bad people there,
they are always annoying and behaving ill to him, because he will not
join in their idle and vicious amusements. The head turnkey, who is a
very good sort of man, advised me to recommend Germain, for his own
sake, not to keep himself at quite such a distance from his companions,
but to try and familiarise himself with these bad men. However, it is no
use trying; he cannot bring himself to endure their company or
conversation. And I am constantly tormented with the dread that some of
these days they will do him some harm out of spite."

Then all at once interrupting herself, and drying her tears, Rigolette
resumed:

"But, dear me, how selfish I am! I keep talking of my own concerns
without ever recollecting to speak to you about the Goualeuse."

"The Goualeuse!" exclaimed Rodolph, with surprise.

"I met her the day before yesterday, when I went to see Louise at St.
Lazare."

"The Goualeuse?"

"Yes, indeed, M. Rodolph."

"At St. Lazare?"

"She was leaving the prison in company with an elderly female."

"It cannot be," exclaimed Rodolph, in extreme astonishment; "you must be
mistaken."

"I assure you it was herself, M. Rodolph."

"You really must be in error."

"Oh, no, I was not mistaken; although she was dressed as a country girl
I recollected her again directly. She looked beautiful as ever, though
pale; and she had just the same melancholy look she used to have."

"How very strange that she should be in Paris without my having heard of
it! I can scarcely credit it. And what had she been doing at St.
Lazare?"

"I suppose, like myself, she had been to see some one confined there;
but I had not time to ask her many questions, for the person who was
with her seemed so very cross, and to be in such a hurry! Then it seems
you know the Goualeuse as well as myself, M. Rodolph?"

"I do, certainly."

"Oh, then, that settles the matter! And it must have been of you she
spoke."

"Of me?"

"Yes, indeed, M. Rodolph. For, you see, I was just mentioning to her
what had happened to poor Louise and Germain,--both so good, yet so
persecuted by that wicked Jacques Ferrand,--taking care to do as you bid
me, and not say a word of your being interested in their welfare so then
the Goualeuse told me if a generous person she knew were once acquainted
with their hard fate, and how little they deserved it, he would be sure
to assist them. And then I asked her the name of the person she alluded
to, and she named you, M. Rodolph."

"Oh, then, it was her, sure enough."

"You can't imagine how much surprised we both were at this discovery,
either of resemblance or name; and before we parted we agreed to let
each other know whether our M. Rodolph was one and the same. And it
seems you are the very identical Rodolph both of La Goualeuse and
myself. Are you not, neighbour?"

"I believe so; and I can, at least, assure you I take the greatest
possible interest in the fate of this poor girl,--still I am much
surprised to find, by what you say, that she is in Paris. And so great
is my astonishment that, had you not so faithfully related your
interview, I should have persisted in believing you were mistaken. But I
must say good-bye for the present,--what you tell me respecting La
Goualeuse obliges me to quit you. Be as careful as ever in not
mentioning to any one that there are certain unknown friends watching
over the welfare both of Louise and Germain, who will come forward at a
right moment and see them safe through their troubles; it is more
essential than ever that strict secrecy should be kept on this point. By
the way, how are the Morel family getting on?"

"Oh, extremely well, M. Rodolph. The mother has quite got about again,
and the children are daily improving. Ah, the whole family owe their
life and happiness to you! You are so good and so generous to them."

"And how is poor Morel himself? Does he get any better?"

"Oh, dear, yes; I heard of him yesterday, he seems from time to time to
have some lucid moments, and hopes are entertained of his madness being
curable. So be of good heart, neighbour, take care of yourself, and
good-bye for the present."

"But first tell me truly, are you quite sure you want for nothing? Are
you still able to maintain yourself with the profits of your needle?"

"Oh, yes, thank you, M. Rodolph. I work rather later at night to make up
for my lost time during the day. But it does not matter much, for if I
go to bed I don't sleep."

"Poor, dear neighbour! Why, you have grown sadly out of spirits. I am
afraid that Papa Crétu and Ramonette don't sing much, if they wait for
you to set them the example."

"You are right enough, M. Rodolph, my birds have quite left off singing,
as well as myself. Now I know you will laugh at me, but I'll tell you
what I firmly think and believe,--the poor little creatures are aware
that I am dull and out of spirits, and instead of singing and warbling
as if their little throats would burst for joy when they see me, they
just give a little gentle twitter, as though they would not disturb me
for the world, but would be so glad to console me if they had the power.
It is very stupid of me to fancy such things, is it not, M. Rodolph?"

"Not at all! And I am quite sure that your affectionate friends the
birds have observed your being less happy than usual."

"Well, I'm sure I shouldn't wonder! The poor, dear things are so very
clever," said Rigolette, innocently, delighted to find her own opinion
as to the sagacity of her companions in solitude thus powerfully
confirmed.

"Oh, I am quite sure about it, nothing is more intelligent than
gratitude. But once more, good-bye,--I shall see you again soon, I hope,
and by that time, I trust your pretty eyes will have grown brighter,
your cheeks regained their usual roses, and your merry voice have
recovered all its gaiety, till Papa Crétu and Ramonette will scarcely be
able to keep up with you."

"Heaven grant you may prove a true prophet, M. Rodolph!" said Rigolette,
heaving a deep sigh. "But, good-bye, neighbour, don't let me keep you."

"Fare you well, for the present!"

Rodolph, wholly at a loss to understand why Madame Georges should have
brought or sent Fleur-de-Marie to Paris without giving him the least
intimation of her intention, hastened home for the purpose of
despatching a special messenger to the farm at Bouqueval.

Just as he entered the Rue Plumet he observed a travelling carriage
drawn up before the entrance of his hotel. The vehicle contained Murphy,
who had that instant returned from Normandy, whither he had gone, as the
reader is already aware, to counteract the base schemes of the stepmother
of Madame d'Harville and her infamous confederate, Bradamanti.




CHAPTER II.

MURPHY AND POLIDORI.


Sir Walter Murphy's features were beaming with satisfaction. When he
alighted from the carriage he gave a brace of pistols to one of the
prince's servants, took off his long travelling coat, and, without
giving himself time to change his clothes, followed Rodolph, who
impatiently had preceded him to his apartment.

"Good news, monseigneur! Good news!" exclaimed the squire, when he was
alone with Rodolph; "the wretches are unmasked, M. d'Orbigny is saved.
You despatched me just in time; one hour later and another crime would
have been committed."

"And Madame d'Harville?"

"Is overjoyed at having again acquired her father's affection; and full
of happiness at having arrived, thanks to your advice, in time to snatch
him from certain death."

"So, then, Polidori--"

"Was, in this instance, the worthy accomplice of Madame d'Harville's
stepmother. But what a wretch is this stepmother! What _sang-froid_!
What audacity! And this Polidori! Ah, monseigneur, you have frequently
desired to thank me for what you call my proofs of devotion."

"I have always said proofs of friendship, my dear Murphy."

"Well, monseigneur, never--no, never--has this friendship been exposed
to a severer trial than in this present case!" said the squire, with an
air half serious, half pleasant.

"What mean you?"

"The disguises of the coalman, the peregrinations in the Cité, and all
that sort of thing, they have been as nothing, actually nothing, when
compared with the journey I have just made with that infernal Polidori."

"What do you mean? Polidori?"

"I have brought him back with me."

"With you?"

"With me: judge what company! During twelve hours side by side with the
man I most despise and hate in the world,--I'd as soon travel with a
serpent--any beast of antipathy!"

"And where is Polidori now?"

"In the house in the Allée des Veuves, under good and safe guard."

"Then he made no resistance to following you?"

"None. I offered him the choice between being apprehended at once by the
French authorities, or being my prisoner in the Allée des Veuves,--he
didn't hesitate for an instant."

"You are right; it is best to have him thus in our grasp. You are worth
your weight in gold, my dear old Murphy. But tell me all about your
journey; I am impatient to know how this shameless woman, and her
equally shameless accomplice, were at last unmasked."

"Nothing could be more simple. I had only to follow the letter of your
instructions in order to terrify and crush these wretches. Under these
circumstances, monseigneur, you have served, as you always do, persons
of worth, and punished the wicked, noble preserver that you are!"

"Sir Walter! Sir Walter! Do you recollect the flatteries of the Baron de
Graün?" said Rodolph, smiling.

"Well, then, monseigneur, I will begin,--or, perhaps, you would prefer
first reading this letter of the Marquise d'Harville's, which will
inform you on every point that occurred previous to my arrival, which so
completely confounded Polidori."

"A letter! Pray let me have it immediately."

Murphy gave the letter of the marquise to Rodolph, adding:

"As we had agreed, instead of accompanying Madame d'Harville to her
father's, I alighted at a small inn quite close to the château, where I
was to wait until the marquise sent for me."

Rodolph read what follows with tender and impatient solicitude:

     "MONSEIGNEUR:--After all I owe you already, I now owe to you my
   father's life. I will allow facts to speak for themselves; they
   will say better than I can what fresh accumulations of gratitude
   to you I have added to those already amassed in my heart.
   Understanding all the importance of the advice you sent to me by
   Sir Walter Murphy, who overtook me on my way to Normandy a short
   distance from Paris, I travelled as speedily as possible to the
   Château des Aubiers. I know not why, but the countenances of the
   persons who received me appeared to me sinister. I did not see
   amongst them any one of the old servitors of our house; no one
   knew me. I was obliged to tell them my name.

   "I learned that for several days my father had been suffering
   greatly, and that my stepmother had just brought a physician
   from Paris. I had no doubt but this was Doctor Polidori.
   Desirous of being immediately conducted to my father, I inquired
   for an old _valet de chambre_ to whom he was much attached; he
   had quitted the château some time previously. This I learned
   from a house-steward who had shown me to my apartment, saying
   that he would inform my stepmother of my arrival. Was it
   illusion or suspicion? It seemed to me that my coming annoyed
   the people at the château where all was gloomy and sinister. In
   the bent of mind in which I was we seek to draw inferences from
   the slightest circumstances. I remarked in every part traces of
   disorder and neglect, as if it had been too much trouble to take
   care of a house which was so soon to be abandoned. My
   uneasiness--my anxiety increased at every moment.

   "After having established my daughter and her governess in an
   apartment, I was about to proceed to my father, when my
   stepmother entered the apartment. In spite of her artfulness,
   in spite of the control which she ordinarily exercised over
   herself, she appeared alarmed at my sudden arrival. 'M.
   d'Orbigny does not expect your visit, madame,' she said to me,
   'and he is suffering so much that a surprise may be fatal. I
   think it, therefore, best that he should not be told of your
   arrival, for he would be unable to account for it, and--'

   "I did not allow her to finish. 'A terrible event has occurred,
   madame,' I said, 'M. d'Harville is dead, in consequence of a
   fatal imprudence. After so deplorable a result, I could no
   longer remain in Paris in my own house, and I have, therefore,
   come to my father's, in order to pass the first days of my
   mourning.'

   "'A widow! Ah, that, indeed, is unexpected happiness!' exclaimed
   my stepmother, in a rage. From what you know, monseigneur, of
   the unhappy marriage which this woman had planned in order to
   avenge herself on me, you will comprehend the brutality of her
   remark.

   "'It is because I fear you might be as unexpectedly happy as
   myself, madame, that I came here,' was my (perhaps imprudent)
   reply. 'I wish to see my father.'

   "'That's impossible, at this moment!' she replied, turning very
   pale; 'the sight of you would cause a dangerous degree of
   excitement.'

   "'If my father is so seriously ill,' I observed, 'why was I not
   informed of it?'

   "'Such was M. d'Orbigny's will,' replied my stepmother.

   "'I do not believe you, madame! and I shall go and assure myself
   of the truth,' I said, and turned towards the door of my
   chamber.

   "'I tell you again that the unexpected sight of you may have a
   most prejudicial effect on your father!' she cried, coming
   before me so as to hinder my further progress; 'I will not allow
   you to go into his room, until I have informed him of your
   arrival with all the care and precaution which his situation
   requires.'

   "I was in a cruel perplexity, monseigneur. A sudden surprise
   might really be dangerous to my father, but this woman,--usually
   so calm, so self-possessed--seemed to me so overcome by my
   presence, I had so many reasons to doubt the sincerity of her
   solicitude for the health of him whom she had married from
   cupidity; and then, too, the presence of Doctor Polidori, the
   murderer of my mother, caused me altogether such extreme alarm
   that, believing my father's life menaced, I did not hesitate
   between the hope of saving him and the fear of causing him
   severe emotion. 'I will see my father, and that instantly!' I
   said to my stepmother. And although she tried to retain me by
   the arm, I went out of the room. Completely losing her presence
   of mind, this woman tried a second time, and almost by force, to
   prevent me from quitting the chamber. This incredible resistance
   increased my alarm, I disengaged myself from her grasp, and,
   knowing my father's apartment, I ran thither with all speed, and
   entered the room.

   "Oh, monseigneur, during my life I never can forget that scene,
   and the picture presented to my eyes. My father, scarcely to be
   recognised, pale and meagre, with suffering depicted in every
   feature, his head reclining on a pillow, was lying extended on a
   large armchair. At the corner of the fireplace, standing close
   to him, was Doctor Polidori, just about to pour into a cup,
   which a nurse presented to him, some drops of a liquor contained
   in a small glass bottle which he held in his hand. His long red
   beard gave even a more than usually sinister appearance to his
   physiognomy. I entered so hastily that he gave a look of
   surprise at my stepmother, who followed me with hasty steps; and
   instead of handing to my father the draught he had prepared for
   him, he suddenly placed the phial on the mantelpiece. Guided by
   an instinct for which I am unable to account, my first movement
   was to seize the phial. Remarking instantly the surprise and
   alarm of my stepmother and Polidori, I congratulated myself on
   my promptitude. My father, amazed, seemed irritated at the sight
   of me. I expected this. Polidori darted at me a ferocious scowl,
   and, in spite of the presence of my father and the nurse, I
   feared the wretch, seeing his crime so nearly disclosed, would
   have recourse to violence with me. I felt the necessity of
   support at a moment so decisive; and ringing the bell, one of my
   father's servants came in, whom I requested to tell my _valet de
   chambre_ (who had already been informed) to go and seek some
   things I had left at the little inn. Sir Walter Murphy was aware
   that, in order not to arouse my stepmother's suspicions, in case
   it should be necessary to give my orders in her presence, I
   should employ this means of requesting him to come to me. Such
   was the surprise of my father and stepmother, that the servant
   quitted the room before they could utter a word. I felt my
   courage then rise, for, in a few minutes, Sir Walter Murphy
   would be at my side.

   "'What does all this mean?' said my father to me, in a voice
   feeble, but still angry and imperious. 'You here, Clémence
   without my sending for you? Then, scarcely arrived, you seize
   the phial containing the draught the doctor was about to give
   me. Will you explain this madness?'

   "'Leave the room,' said my stepmother to the nurse. The woman
   obeyed. 'Compose yourself, my dear!' said my stepmother,
   addressing my father; 'you know how injurious the slightest
   emotion is to you. Since your daughter will come here in spite
   of you, and her presence is so disagreeable to you, give me your
   arm. I will lead you into the small salon, and then our good
   doctor will make Madame d'Harville comprehend how imprudent her
   conduct has been, to say the least of it.' And she gave her
   accomplice a meaning look. I at once saw through my stepmother's
   design. She was desirous of leading my father away, and leaving
   me alone with Polidori, who, in this extreme case, no doubt,
   would have used force to obtain from me the phial which might
   supply so evident a proof of his criminal designs.

   "'You are right,' said my father to my stepmother. 'Since I am
   thus pursued, even in my private apartments, without respect for
   my wishes, I will leave the place free to intruders.' And rising
   with difficulty, he took the arm that was offered to him by my
   stepmother, and went towards the salon.

   "At this moment Polidori advanced towards me; but I went close
   up to my father and said to him, 'I will explain to you why I
   have arrived so suddenly, and what may appear strange in my
   conduct. I became yesterday a widow; and it was yesterday,
   father, that I learned your life was threatened.' He was walking
   very much bent, but at these words he stopped, threw himself
   erect, and looking at me with intense surprise, said:

   "'You are a widow? My life is threatened? What does all this
   mean?'

   "'And who dares threaten the life of M. d'Orbigny, madame?'
   asked my stepmother, most audaciously.

   "'Yes, who threatens it?' added Polidori.

   "'You, sir!--you, madame!' I replied.

   "'What horror!' exclaimed my stepmother, advancing a step
   towards me.

   "'What I assert I will prove, madame!' I replied.

   "'Such an accusation is most frightful!' cried my father.

   "'I will leave the house this very moment, since I am exposed to
   such shameful calumnies,' said Doctor Polidori, with the
   apparent indignation of a man whose honour has been outraged.
   Beginning to feel the danger of his position, no doubt, he was
   desirous of effecting his escape. At the moment when he was
   trying to open the door, it opened, and he found himself face to
   face with Sir Walter Murphy."

Rodolph ceased reading, held out his hand to the squire, and said:

"Well done, my good old friend; your presence must have crushed the
scoundrel!"

"That's precisely the word, monseigneur. He turned livid, receded a
couple of paces, looking at me aghast; he seemed thunderstruck. To find
me at the further extremity of Normandy, in such a moment, he must have
thought he had a terrible dream. But go on, monseigneur; you will see
that this infernal Comtesse d'Orbigny had her share of the overwhelming
shame, thanks to what you told me as to her visit to the charlatan
Bradamanti--Polidori--in the house in the Rue du Temple; for, after all,
it was you who acted in this, I assure you, and you came in most happily
and opportunely to the rescue on this occasion."

Rodolph smiled, and continued reading Madame d'Harville's letter:

   "At the sight of Sir Walter Murphy, Polidori was panic-struck;
   my stepmother went on from one surprise to another; my father,
   agitated at this scene, weakened by his malady, was compelled to
   sit down in an armchair. Sir Walter double-locked the door by
   which he had entered; and placing himself before that which led
   to the next apartment, that Doctor Polidori might not escape, he
   said to my poor father, with a tone of the utmost respect, 'A
   thousand pardons, Monsieur le Comte, for the liberty I take, but
   an imperious necessity, dictated by your interest alone (and
   which you will speedily recognise), compels me to act thus. My
   name is Sir Walter Murphy, as this wretch can testify, who at
   the sight of me trembles in every limb. I am the private adviser
   of his royal highness Monseigneur the Grand Duke Regnant of
   Gerolstein.'

   "'Quite true!' stammered forth Doctor Polidori, overcome with
   fright. 'But then, sir, what have you come here for? What seek
   you?'

   "'Sir Walter Murphy,' I observed, addressing my father, 'is here
   with me to unmask the wretches whose victim you have so nearly
   been.' Then handing the phial to Sir Walter, I added, 'I was
   suddenly tempted to seize on this phial at the moment when
   Doctor Polidori was about to pour some drops of the liquor it
   contains into a draught he was about to offer to my father.'

   "'A practitioner in the neighbouring village shall analyse
   before you the contents of this bottle, which I will deposit in
   your hands, M. le Comte; and if it is proved to contain a slow
   and sure poison,' said Sir Walter Murphy to my father, 'you
   cannot have any further doubt as to the dangers you have run,
   and which the tender care of your daughter will most happily
   have averted.'

   "My poor father looked by turns at his wife, Doctor Polidori,
   and Sir Walter, with an air of doubt and anxiety; his features
   betrayed indescribable anguish. No doubt but he resisted with
   all his might increasing and terrible suspicions, fearing to be
   obliged to confess the infamy of my stepmother. At length,
   concealing his head in his hands, he exclaimed, 'Oh, this is,
   indeed, horrible!--impossible! Am I in a dream?'

   "'No, it is no dream!' cried my stepmother, audaciously;
   'nothing can be more real than this atrocious calumny, concerted
   beforehand to destroy an unhappy woman, whose only crime is that
   of consecrating her whole existence to you. Come, come, my dear,
   do not remain a moment longer here!' she continued, addressing
   my father; 'I do not suppose that your daughter will have the
   insolence to retain you here against your will.'

   "'Yes, yes, let me go!' said my father, highly excited; 'all
   this is not true--cannot be true! I will not hear any more, my
   brain cannot endure it. Fearful misgivings would arise in my
   mind, which would embitter the few days I have still to live,
   and nothing could console me for so horrible a discovery.'

   "My father seemed to suffer so much, to be so despairing that,
   at all hazards, I resolved on putting an end to this scene,
   which was so acutely trying for him. Sir Walter guessed my
   desire, but desirous of full and entire justice, he replied to
   my father, 'But a few words more, M. le Comte. You will, no
   doubt, suffer chagrin of a most painful kind, when you detect in
   the woman's conduct, whom you believe attached to you by
   gratitude, a system of most atrocious ingratitude,--in herself a
   hypocritical monster. But you will find your consolation in the
   affections of your daughter, who has never failed you.'

   "'This passes all bounds!' cried my stepmother, with rage. 'And
   by what right, sir, and on what proofs, dare you to base such
   infamous calumnies? You say the phial contains poison? I deny
   it, and will deny it until you prove the contrary. And even
   supposing Doctor Polidori has by mistake confounded one medicine
   with another, is that a reason why you should dare to accuse me
   of having sought--desired to be his accomplice? Oh, no, no! I
   cannot go on! An idea so horrible is already a crime! Once
   again, sir, I defy you to say upon what proofs you and madame
   here dare rely to support this shameful calumny!' said my
   stepmother, with incredible audacity.

   "'Yes, on what proofs?' exclaimed my poor father; 'the torture I
   undergo must have an end.'

   "'I am not here, sir, without proofs, M. le Comte,' replied Sir
   Walter; 'and these proofs, the answer of this wretch shall
   supply to you instantly.' Then Sir Walter spoke in German to
   Doctor Polidori, who seemed to have suddenly assumed a little
   assurance, but lost it as soon."

"What did you say to him?" inquired Rodolph of the squire, pausing from
his perusal of the letter.

"A few significant words, monseigneur, something like this: 'You have
escaped by flight from the sentence passed upon you by law and justice
in the Grand Duchy; you live in the Rue du Temple, under the false name
of Bradamanti; we know the infamous calling you pursue there. You
poisoned the count's first wife. Three days since Madame d'Orbigny went
to find you, in order to bring you here to poison her husband. His royal
highness is in Paris, and has proofs of all I now aver. If you confess
the truth in order to confound this wretched woman, you may hope, not
for pardon, but for an amelioration of the punishment you deserve. You
will accompany me to Paris, where I will deposit you in a safe place,
until his royal highness decides on what shall be done with you. If not,
one of two things: either his royal highness will demand and obtain your
delivery up to him, or this very moment I will send for the nearest
magistrate, this phial containing the poison shall be handed to him, you
will be apprehended on the spot, and a search be made instantly at your
domicile in the Rue du Temple; you know how utterly that must compromise
you, and then the justice of the French courts will take its course.
Choose therefore.' These disclosures, accusations, and threats, which he
knew to be so well founded, succeeding each other thus rapidly,
overwhelmed the scoundrel, who did not dream of my being so thoroughly
informed. In the hope of diminishing his expected punishment, he did not
hesitate to sacrifice his accomplice, and replied to me, 'Interrogate
me, and I will disclose the whole truth as regards this woman.'"

"Capital! Excellent! my dear Murphy. I expected no less of you."

"During my conversation with Polidori, the features of Madame
d'Harville's stepmother became greatly agitated. Although she did not
understand German, she saw, by the increasing dejection of her
accomplice, by his deprecating attitude, that I controlled him. In a
state of fearful anxiety, she endeavoured to catch Polidori's glance, in
order to inspire him with courage, or implore his discretion, but he
carefully avoided looking towards her."

"And the count?"

"His agitation was inexpressible! With his clenched hands he grasped
convulsively the arms of his chair, the perspiration stood on his brow,
and he scarcely breathed, whilst his burning and fixed eyes never
quitted mine; his agony was equal to his wife's. The remainder of Madame
d'Harville's letter will tell you the conclusion of this painful scene,
monseigneur."

Rodolph continued the perusal of Madame d'Harville's letter:

   "After a conversation in German, which lasted for some minutes,
   between Sir Walter Murphy and Polidori, Sir Walter said to the
   latter, 'Now reply. Was it not madame,' and he looked towards my
   stepmother, 'who, during the illness of the count's first wife,
   introduced you to him as a physician?'

   "'Yes, it was!' replied Polidori.

   "'In order that you might serve the horrid projects of madame,
   were you not criminal enough to render mortal, by your deadly
   prescriptions, the malady of the Countess d'Orbigny, which was
   but slight in the first instance?'

   "'Yes!' replied Polidori. My father heaved a painful sigh,
   raised both his hands to heaven, and let them fall perfectly
   overcome.

   "'Lies and infamies!' cried my stepmother; 'it is all false,--a
   plot got up to destroy me!'

   "'Silence, madame!' said Sir Walter Murphy, in an authoritative
   voice. Then continuing to address Polidori, 'Is it true that
   three days since madame was at your residence in the Rue du
   Temple, No. 17, where you lived under the assumed name of
   Bradamanti?'

   "'That is true.'

   "'Did not madame propose to you to come here to assassinate the
   Comte d'Orbigny, as you had assassinated his wife?'

   "'Alas! I cannot deny it!' said Polidori.

   "At this overwhelming revelation my father rose up, then,
   extending his arms to me, he exclaimed, in a broken voice, 'In
   the name of your unfortunate mother, pardon, pardon! I made her
   suffer much, but I swear to you I was a stranger to the crime
   which led her to the tomb!' and before I could prevent it, my
   father fell at my knees. When Sir Walter and I raised him he had
   fainted. I rang for the servants. Sir Walter took Polidori by
   the arm and led him out of the room with him, saying to my
   stepmother, 'Believe me, madame, it is best for you to leave
   this house within an hour, otherwise I will deliver you up to
   justice.' The wretched woman left the room in a state of rage
   and affright, which you will easily conceive. When my father
   recovered his senses, all that had occurred seemed to him a
   horrid dream. I was under the sad necessity of imparting to him
   my first suspicions as to my mother's premature death,
   suspicions which your knowledge of Doctor Polidori's earlier
   crimes had converted into certainty. I also told him how my
   stepmother had persecuted me to the time of my marriage, and
   what had been her object in making me marry M. d'Harville. In
   proportion as my father had shown himself weak with respect to
   this woman, so was he now pitiless towards her. He was desirous
   of handing Madame d'Orbigny over to the tribunals. I represented
   to him the horrible scandal of such a process, the publicity of
   which must be so distressing to him; and I induced him to allow
   her as much as was requisite for her to live upon. I had
   considerable difficulty in persuading my father to these terms,
   and he then wished me to dismiss her. This task was so painful
   that I requested Sir Walter to perform it for me, which he did."

"I consented with pleasure," interrupted Murphy.

"And what said this woman?"

"Madame d'Harville kindly solicited a pension of a hundred louis for
this woman: this appeared to me not only kindness, but weakness; it was
bad enough to allow her to escape from justice; and the count agreeing
with me, it was arranged that we should give her in all twenty-five
louis to maintain her until she should find some occupation. 'And to
what occupation can I, the Countess d'Orbigny, turn?' she asked me,
insolently. '_Ma foi!_ that is your affair,--you may do as a nurse or
housekeeper; but take my advice and seek some humbler, more obscure
occupation, for if you have the daring to mention your name--a name
which you owe to a crime--people will be astonished to see the Countess
d'Orbigny reduced to such a condition; they will then begin to make
inquiries, and you may judge what will be the result, if you are so
indiscreet as to say one word of the past. Hide yourself, therefore, at
a distance,--try and become forgotten; become Madame Pierre or Madame
Jacques, and repent if you can.' 'And do you suppose, sir,' she said,
having, no doubt, resolved on a piece of stage effect, 'do you suppose
that I shall not sue for the advantage which my marriage settlement
awards me?' 'Why, madame, nothing can be more just; it will be
dishonourable of M. d'Orbigny not to execute his promises, and forget
all you have done--and particularly all you wished to do towards him. Go
to law--go to law! Try for justice, and, no doubt, it will right you
with your husband.' A quarter of an hour after our conversation the
wretch of a woman was on the road to the neighbouring town."

"You are right, it is painful to leave such an abandoned creature
unpunished, but a law proceeding is impossible."

   "I easily persuaded my father to leave Aubiers the same day,"

resumed Rodolph, continuing the perusal of Madame d'Harville's letter,

   "as too many painful feelings were excited by his being where he
   was. His weak health will be benefited by a few days' change of
   air and scene, as the doctor saw, whom Polidori had succeeded,
   and for whom I sent from the neighbouring town. My father wished
   him to analyse the contents of the phial, without giving him any
   information as to what had passed. The doctor informed us that
   he must do this at home, and that in two hours we should know
   the result of his scrutiny; which was that several doses of this
   liquor, composed with devilish skill, would, within a certain
   time, cause death, without leaving any traces beyond those of an
   ordinary malady, which he mentioned. In a few hours,
   monseigneur, I go with my father and daughter to Fontainebleau,
   where we shall remain for some time; then my father wishes to
   return to Paris, but not to my house, for I could not reside
   there after the late appalling event. As I mentioned in the
   beginning of my letter, monseigneur, facts prove all I shall owe
   to your inexhaustible care and solicitude. Forewarned by you,
   aided by your advice, strong in the assistance of your excellent
   and high-couraged Sir Walter, I have been enabled to snatch my
   father from certain death, and am again assured of his love.
   Adieu, monseigneur, it is impossible for me to say more; my
   heart is too full, and I explain but faintly all I feel."

                                       "D'ORBIGNY D'HARVILLE."

   "I open my letter to repair something I had, I regret to say,
   forgotten. According to your noble suggestion, I went to the
   prison of St. Lazare, to visit the poor women prisoners, and I
   found there an unhappy girl in whom you are interested. Her
   angelic mildness, her pious resignation, were the admiration of
   the respectable women who superintend the prisoners. To say that
   she is called La Goualeuse is to urge you to obtain her liberty
   instantly. The poor girl will tell you under what circumstances
   she was carried off from the asylum in which you had placed her,
   and was put in prison, where, at least, the candour and
   sweetness of her disposition have been appreciated. Permit me,
   also, to recall to you my two future protégées, the unhappy
   mother and daughter despoiled by the notary Ferrand,--where are
   they? I pray of you to try and discover them, so that, on my
   return to Paris, I may pay the debt I have contracted towards
   all unfortunate beings."

"What! Has La Goualeuse, then, left the Bouqueval farm?" inquired
Murphy, as much astonished as Rodolph at this fresh discovery.

"Just now I was informed that she had been seen quitting St. Lazare,"
replied Rodolph. "I am quite bewildered on the subject; Madame Georges's
silence surprises and disturbs me. Poor little Fleur-de-Marie, what
fresh disasters can have befallen her? Send a man on horseback directly
to the farm, and write to Madame Georges that I beg of her to come to
Paris instantly. Request M. de Graün to procure for me a permission to
visit St. Lazare. By what Madame d'Harville says to me, Fleur-de-Marie
must be confined there. Yet, no," he added, "she cannot be there, for
Rigolette saw her leave the prison with an aged woman. Could it be
Madame Georges? If not, who could be the woman that accompanied La
Goualeuse?"

"Patience, monseigneur; before the evening you will know all about it.
Then to-morrow you can interrogate that vagabond Polidori, who has, he
assures me, important disclosures to make,--but to you alone."

"This interview will be most odious to me!" said Rodolph, sorrowfully;
"for I have never seen this man since the fatal day when I--"

Rodolph, unable to finish, hid his face in his hands.

"But, monseigneur, why accede to Polidori's request? Threaten him with
the justice of the French law, or immediate surrender to your authority,
and then he will reveal to me what he now declares he will only reveal
to you."

"You are right, my worthy friend; for the presence of this wretch would
make my terrible recollections even still more distressing, connected as
they are with incurable griefs,--from my father's death to that of my
daughter. I know not how it is, but as I advance in life the more I seem
to miss that dear child. How I should have adored her! How very dear and
precious to me she would have been, this offspring of my first love, of
my earliest and purest beliefs--or, rather, my young illusions! I should
have poured out on this innocent creature those treasures of affection
of which her hateful mother is so unworthy; and it seems to me that, as
I have dreamt, this child, by the beauty of her mind, the charm of her
qualities, would have soothed and softened all my griefs, all these
pangs of remorse, which are, alas, attached to her fatal birth."

"Monseigneur, I see with grief the increasing empire which these
regrets, as vain as they are bitter, assume over your mind."

After some moments' silence, Rodolph said to Murphy:

"I will now make a confession to you, my old friend. I love--yes, I
passionately love--a woman worthy of the noblest, the most devoted
affection. Since my heart has again expanded to all the sweetness of
love, since I am thus again affected by tender emotions, I feel more
deeply than ever the loss of my daughter. I might have feared that an
attachment of the heart would weaken the bitterness of my regrets. It is
not so; all my loving qualities--my affections--are but the keener. I
feel myself better, more charitable; and more than ever is it afflicting
to me not to have my daughter to adore."

"Nothing more easily explained, monseigneur,--forgive me the
comparison,--but, as certain men have a joyous and benevolent
intoxication, so you have good and generous love."

"Still, my hatred of the wicked has become more intense; my aversion for
Sarah increases, in proportion, no doubt, to the grief I experience at
my daughter's death. I imagine to myself that that wretched mother must
have neglected her, and that, when once her ambitious hopes were ruined
by my marriage, the countess, in her pitiless selfishness, abandoned our
daughter to mercenary hands, and, perhaps, my child died from actual
neglect. It is my fault, also. I did not then think of the sacred duties
which paternity imposes. When Sarah's real character was suddenly
revealed to me, I ought instantly to have taken my daughter from her,
and watched over her with love and anxiety. I ought to have foreseen
that the countess would make but a very unnatural mother. It is my
fault,--yes, indeed, my fault."

"Monseigneur, grief distracts you! Could you, after the sad event you
know of, delay for a day the long journey imposed on you, as--"

"As an expiator! You are right, my friend," said Rodolph, greatly
agitated.

"You have not heard anything of the Countess Sarah since my departure,
monseigneur?"

"No; since those infamous plots which twice nearly destroyed Madame
d'Harville, I have heard nothing of her. Her presence here is hateful to
me,--oppresses me; it seems as though my evil demon was near me, and
some new misfortune threatens me."

"Patience, patience, monseigneur! Fortunately Germany is forbidden
ground to her, and Germany awaits us."

"Yes, we shall go very soon. At least, during my short residence in
Paris, I shall have accomplished a sacred vow, and have made some steps
in the meritorious path which an august and merciful will has traced for
my redemption. As soon as Madame Georges's son is restored to her tender
arms, free and innocent; as soon as Jacques Ferrand shall be convicted
and punished for his crimes; as soon as I am assured of the good
prosperity of all the honest and hard-working creatures who, by their
resignation, courage, and probity, have deserved my interest, we will
return to Germany, and then my journey will not have been wholly
unfruitful."

"Particularly if you achieve the exposure of that abominable wretch,
Jacques Ferrand, monseigneur,--the angular stone, the pivot on which
turn so many crimes."

"Although the end justifies the means, and scruples with such a
scoundrel are absurd, yet I sometimes regret that I have allowed Cecily
to become an instrument in working out this just and avenging
reparation."

"She ought to be here very shortly."

"She has arrived."

"Cecily?"

"Yes; I refused to see her. De Graün has given her ample instructions,
and she has promised to comply with them."

"Will she keep that promise?"

"Why, everything conspires to make me think so. There is the hope of
ameliorating her future condition, and the fear of being instantly sent
back to Germany to prison; for De Graün will not lose sight of her, and
the least defection on her part will cause her being handed over to
justice."

"True, she comes here as an escaped criminal, and when we know the
crimes that have led to her perpetual imprisonment, she would be at once
surrendered to our demand."

"And then, even if it were not her interest to aid our schemes, the task
which is assigned to her being one which can only be effected by
stratagem, perfidy, and the most devilish seduction, Cecily must be (and
the baron assures me she really is) overjoyed at such an opportunity for
playing off those infernal advantages with which she is so liberally
endowed."

"Is she as handsome as she was, monseigneur?"

"De Graün declares that she is more attractive than ever; he told me
that he was really quite dazzled at her beauty, to which the Alsatian
costume she had chosen gave even more piquancy. The glance of this devil
in petticoats, he says, has still the same really magic expression."

"Why, monseigneur, I have never been what is called a dissipated fellow,
a man without heart or conduct, but if at twenty years of age I had met
with Cecily, even knowing her then to be as dangerous, as wicked as I do
now, I assure you I would not have answered for myself, if I had been
for any time exposed to the fire of her large, black, and brilliant
eyes, sparkling in the centre of her pale and ardent countenance. Yes,
by heaven! I dare not think of the extremities into which so fatal an
amour might have urged me."

"I am not astonished, my dear Murphy, for I know this woman. Moreover,
the baron was really frightened at the quickness with which Cecily
understood--or, rather guessed--the part, at once inciting and platonic,
which she was to play with the notary."

"But will she, think you, be introduced as easily as you wish,
monseigneur, by the intervention of Madame Pipelet? Individuals like
Jacques Ferrand are so suspicious."

"I had relied, with reason, on the sight of Cecily to overcome and
dissipate the notary's distrust."

"What! Has he already seen her?"

"Yesterday. And from what Madame Pipelet told me, I have no doubt but he
was fascinated by the creole, for he instantly took her into service."

"Then, monseigneur, the game is won, and ours."

"I hope so. A ferocious cupidity, a brutal passion, have impelled the
injurer of Louise Morel to the most odious crimes. It is in his passion
and his cupidity that he shall find the terrible punishment of his
crimes,--a punishment which, moreover, shall not be without fruit for
his victims, for you know the aim of all the Creole's wiles."

"Cecily! Cecily! Never did greater wickedness, never more dangerous
corruption, never blacker soul have served for the accomplishment of a
more strict morality, a more just result! And David, monseigneur, what
does he say to this arrangement?"

"Approves of everything. At the pitch of contempt and horror which he
has reached for this creature, he sees in her only the instrument of a
just vengeance. 'If this accursed woman ever could deserve any
commiseration after all the ill she has done me,' he said to me, 'it
would be by devoting herself to the remorseless punishment of this
scoundrel, whose exterminating demon she may become.'"

A servant having knocked at the door, Murphy went out, but soon returned
with two letters, only one of which was for Rodolph.

"A line from Madame Georges," he said, as he hastily perused it.

"Well, monseigneur, and La Goualeuse?"

"There can be no further doubt," exclaimed Rodolph, after having read,
"there is some dark plot afoot. On the evening of the day when the poor
girl disappeared from the farm, and at the instant when Madame Georges
was about to inform me of this event, a man unknown to her, sent express
and on horseback, came as from me to tell her that I was aware of the
sudden disappearance of Fleur-de-Marie, and that in a few days I should
take her back to the farm. In spite of this, Madame Georges, uneasy at
my silence with respect to her protégée, cannot, as she says, resist the
desire to hear how her dear daughter is, for so she calls her."

"It is very strange, monseigneur."

"What could be the motive for carrying off Fleur-de-Marie?"

"Monseigneur!" said Murphy, suddenly, "the Countess Sarah is no stranger
to this carrying off."

"Sarah! And what makes you think so?"

"Compare this event with her denunciations against Madame d'Harville."

"You are right!" cried Rodolph, struck with a sudden light, "it is
evident--now I understand. Yes, constantly the one calculation. The
countess persists in thinking that by breaking down all the affections
which she supposes me to form, she will make me feel the necessity of
attaching myself to her. This is as odious as it is absurd. Still, such
unworthy persecution must be put a stop to. It is not only myself, but
all that deserve respect, interest, and pity, that this woman assails.
Send M. de Graün instantly and officially to the countess and let him
say that I have the certain assurance that she has been instrumental in
carrying off Fleur-de-Marie, and if she does not give me at once such
information as is necessary for me to find the poor girl, I will show no
mercy; and then M. de Graün will go to the law officers of the crown."

"According to Madame d'Harville's letter, La Goualeuse must be in St.
Lazare."

"Yes, but Rigolette declares that she saw her free, and quit the prison.
There is some mystery which I must clear up."

"I will instantly go and give the Baron de Graün your orders,
monseigneur. But allow me to open this letter, which comes from my
correspondent at Marseilles, to whom I had recommended the Chourineur,
as he was to facilitate the passage of the poor devil to Algeria."

"Well, has he set sail?"

"Monseigneur, it is really singular!"

"What is it?"

"After having waited for a long time at Marseilles for a ship to convey
him to Algeria, the Chourineur, who seemed every day more sad and
serious, suddenly protested, on the very day fixed for his embarkation,
that he should prefer returning to Paris."

"What a whim!"

"Although my correspondent had, as agreed, placed a considerable sum at
the disposal of the Chourineur, he had only taken sufficient for his
return to Paris, where he must shortly arrive."

"Then he will explain to us his change of resolution. But despatch De
Graün immediately to the Countess Macgregor, and go yourself to St.
Lazare, and inquire about Fleur-de-Marie."

       *       *       *       *       *

After the lapse of an hour, the Baron de Graün returned from the
Countess Sarah Macgregor's. In spite of his habitual and official
_sang-froid_, the diplomatist seemed overwhelmed; the groom of the
chambers had scarcely admitted him before Rodolph observed his paleness.

"Well, De Graün, what ails you? Have you seen the countess?"

"Your royal highness must prepare for very painful intelligence--so
unexpected--the Countess Macgregor--"

"The countess, then, is dead?"

"No, but her life is despaired of; she has been stabbed with a
stiletto."

"Horrible!" exclaimed Rodolph. "Who committed the crime?"

"That is not ascertained; the murder was accompanied with robbery; a
large quantity of jewels have been stolen."

"And how is she now?"

"She has not recovered her senses yet; her brother is in despair."

"Send some one daily to make inquiries, my dear De Graün."

At this moment Murphy entered, having returned from St. Lazare.

"Sad news!" said Rodolph to him; "Sarah has been stabbed."

"Ah, monseigneur, though very guilty, one must still pity her."

"Yes, such a fearful end! And La Goualeuse?"

"Set at liberty by the intercession of Madame d'Harville."

"That is impossible! for Madame d'Harville entreats me to take the
necessary steps for getting the poor, unhappy girl out of prison."

"Yet an elderly woman came to St. Lazare, bringing an order to set
Fleur-de-Marie at liberty, and they both quitted the prison together."

"As Rigolette said. But this elderly woman, who can she be? The Countess
Sarah alone can clear this up, and she is in no state to afford us
particulars."

"But her brother, Tom Seyton, may throw some light on it, he has always
been in his sister's confidence."

"His sister is dying, and if there is any fresh plot, he will not say a
word. But," added Rodolph, "we must learn the name of the person who
liberated Fleur-de-Marie, and then we shall arrive at something."

"True, monseigneur."

"Try, then, and find out this person, my dear De Graün; and if you do
not succeed, put your M. Badinot on the scent."

"Your royal highness may rely on my zeal."

"Upon my word, monseigneur," said Murphy, "it is, perhaps, fortunate
that the Chourineur returns to us, his services may be useful."

"You are right; and now I am impatient to see my brave preserver arrive
in Paris, for I never can forget that I owe my life to him."




CHAPTER III.

THE CLERK'S OFFICE.


Several days had elapsed since Jacques Ferrand had taken Cecily into his
service. We will conduct the reader (who already knows the place) into
the notary's office, whilst his clerks are at breakfast. Unheard of,
extravagant, wonderful thing! Instead of the meagre and repulsive broth
brought each morning to these young men by the late Madame Séraphin, an
enormous cold roast turkey, placed in a large box, was enthroned in the
centre of one of the office-tables, flanked by two new loaves, a Dutch
cheese, and three bottles of wine; an ancient leaden inkstand served to
hold a mixture of pepper and salt. Each clerk, provided with a knife and
a strong appetite, awaited the arrival of the head clerk with hungry
impatience, without whom they could not, without a breach of etiquette,
begin to breakfast. A revolution so radical in Jacques Ferrand's office
bespoke some extraordinary domestic mutation. The following conversation
may throw some light on this phenomenon:

"Here is a turkey who did not expect when he was ushered into life ever
to appear on the breakfast-table of our governor's clerks."

"No more than the governor, when he was ushered into the life of a
notary, expected to give his clerks a turkey for breakfast."

"But, at least, the turkey is ours!" said the junior fag of the office,
with a greedy grin.

"Hop-the-Gutter, my friend, you forget yourself; this poultry is and
must be a stranger to you."

"And, like a good Frenchman, you should have a wholesome hatred of the
stranger."

"All that will come to your share may be his feet."

"Emblem of the velocity with which you run on the office errands."

"I thought I might at least have a right to the carcass to pick!"
muttered Hop-the-Gutter.

"Perchance, as an excessive favour, but not as a right; just as with the
Charter of 1814, which was but another carcass of liberty!" said the
Mirabeau of the office.

"Talking of carcasses," observed one youth, with brutal insensibility,
"may heaven receive the soul of Madame Séraphin! For since she was
drowned in her water-party of pleasure, we are no longer condemned to
eternal 'cag-mag.'"

"And, for a whole week, the governor, instead of giving us breakfast--"

"Allows us each two francs a day."

"It was that which made me say, 'Heaven receive the soul of Mother
Séraphin!'"

"Talking of Madame Séraphin, who has seen the servant who has come in
her place?"

"The Alsatian girl whom the portress of the house in which poor Louise
lived brought one evening, as the porter told us?"

"Yes."

"_Parbleu!_ It is quite impossible to get a glimpse of her; for the
governor is more resolute than ever in preventing us from entering into
the pavilion in the courtyard."

"And besides, as it is the porter who now cleans out the office, how can
one see this damsel?"

"Well, I've seen her."

"You?"

"When I say I've seen her, I've seen her cap; such a rum cap!"

"Oh, pooh! What sort?"

"It was cherry-coloured velvet, I think; a kind of skull-cap like the
'buy-a-broom' girls wear."

"Like the Alsaciennes? Why, that's simple enough, as she is an
Alsacienne!"

"I was passing across the yard the day before yesterday, and she was
leaning with her back against one of the windows of the ground floor."

"What! The yard?"

"No, donkey, no,--the servant! The panes of the lower part are so dirty
that I could not see much of the Alsacienne; but those in the middle of
the window were not so grubby, and I saw her cherry-coloured cap and a
profusion of curling hair as black as jet, for she had her head dressed
_à la Titus_."

"I'm sure the governor has not seen even as much as that through his
spectacles; for he is one who, as they say, if he were left alone with
one woman on the earth, then the world would end."

"That is not astonishing. 'He laughs best who laughs last!' And the more
so, as 'Punctuality is the politeness of monarchs!'"

"Jupiter! How stupid Chalamel is when he likes!"

"Deuce take it! Tell me where you go, and I'll tell you who you are!"

"Beautiful!"

"As for me, I think it is superstition which makes our governor more and
more hoggish."

"And, perhaps, it is as a penitence that he gives us forty sous a day
for our breakfast."

"He must, indeed, have taken leave of his senses."

"Or be ill."

"I have thought him very much bewildered these many days past."

"It is not that we see so much of him. He who, for our misery, was in
his study at sunrise, and always at our backs, is now two days without
even poking his nose into the office."

"That gives the head clerk so much to do."

"And we are obliged to die of hunger waiting for him this morning."

"What a change in the office!"

"How poor Germain would be astonished if any one told him, 'Only think,
old fellow, of the governor giving us forty sous for our breakfast.'
'Pooh! Impossible!' 'Quite possible! And I, Chalamel, announce the fact
in my own proper person.' 'What, you want to make me laugh?' 'Yes. Well,
this is the way it came about. For the two or three days which followed
the death of Madame Séraphin we had no breakfast at all; and, in one
respect, that was an improvement, because it was less nasty, but, in
another, our refection cost us money. Still we were patient, saying,
"The governor has no servant or housekeeper; as soon as he gets one we
shall resume the filthy paste gruel." No, by no means, my dear Germain;
the governor has a servant, and yet our breakfast continued buried in
the wave of oblivion. Then I was appointed as a deputation to inform the
governor of the griefs of our stomachs. He was with the chief clerk. "I
will not feed you any longer in the morning," he replied, in his harsh
tone, and as if thinking of something else; "my servant has no time to
prepare your breakfast." "But, sir, it was agreed that you should find
us in breakfasts." "Well, send for your breakfasts from some house, and
I will pay for it. How much is sufficient,--forty sous each?" he added;
all the time evidently thinking of something else, and saying forty sous
as he would say twenty sous or a hundred sous. "Yes, sir, forty sous
will be sufficient," cried I, catching the ball at the bound. "Be it so;
the head clerk will pay you and settle with me." And so saying, the
governor respectfully slammed the door in my face.' You must own,
messieurs, that Germain would be most extraordinarily astonished at the
liberality of the governor."

"Seriously, I think the governor is ill. For the last ten days he has
scarcely been recognisable; his cheeks are so furrowed you could hide
your fist in them."

"And so absent; you should just see him. The other day he lifted his
spectacles to read a deed, and his eyes were as red and glaring as fiery
coals."

"He was right. 'Short reckonings make long friends!'"

"Let me say a word. I will tell you, gentlemen, something very strange.
I handed this deed to the governor, and it was topsy-turvy."

"The governor? How strange! What could he mean by topsy-turvying thus?
Enough to choke him, unless, as you say, his habits are so completely
altered."

"Oh, what a fellow you are, Chalamel! I say I gave him the deed wrong
end up'ards."

"Wasn't he in a rage?"

"Not the slightest. He did not even notice it, but kept his great red
eyes fixed upon it for at least ten minutes, and then handed me back the
deed, saying, 'Very good!'"

"What, still topsy-turvy?"

"Yes."

"Then he couldn't have read it?"

"_Pardieu!_ not unless he can read upside down."

"How odd!"

"The governor looked so dull and cross at the moment that I did not dare
to say a word, and so I left him, just as if nothing had occurred."

"Well, four days ago I was in the head clerk's office; there came a
client, then two or three clients with whom the governor had
appointments. They got tired of waiting; and, at their request, I went
and knocked at his study door. No answer; so in I went."

"Well?"

"M. Jacques Ferrand had his arms crossed on his desk, and his bald and
not overdelicate forehead leaning on his hands. He never stirred."

"Was he asleep?"

"I thought so, and went towards him: 'Sir, there are clients waiting
with whom you have made appointments.' He didn't stir. 'Sir!' No answer.
Then I touched his shoulder, and he bounced up as if the devil had
bitten him. In his start his large green spectacles fell from his eyes
on to his nose, and I saw--you'll never believe it--"

"Well, what?"

"Tears."

"Oh, what nonsense!"

"Quite true."

"What! the governor snivel? No, I won't have that."

"When that's the case why cockchafers will play the cornet-à-piston."

"And cocks and hens wear top-boots."

"Ta, ta, ta, ta; all your folly will not prevent my having seen what I
did see as plain as I see you."

"Weeping?"

"Yes, weeping. And he was in such a precious rage at being surprised in
this lachrymose mood that he adjusted his spectacles in great haste, and
said to me, 'Get out--get out!' 'But, sir--' 'Get out!' 'Three clients
are waiting to whom you have given appointments, and--' 'I have not
time; let them go to the devil along with you!' Then he got up in a
desperate rage to turn me out, but I didn't wait, but went and dismissed
the clients, who were not by any means satisfied; but, for the honour of
the office, I told them that the governor had the whooping-cough."

This interesting conversation was interrupted by the head clerk, who
entered apparently quite overcome. His arrival was hailed by general
acclamation, and all eyes were sympathetically turned towards the
turkey with impatient anxiety.

"Without saying a word, seigneur, you have kept us waiting an infernally
long while," said Chalamel.

"Take care! Another time our appetite will not remain so subordinate."

"Well, gents, it was no fault of mine. I have had much to annoy
me,--more than you have. On my word and honour, the governor must be
going mad."

"Didn't I say so?"

"But that need not prevent one eating."

"On the contrary."

"We can talk just as well with something in our mouths."

"We can talk better," cried Hop-the-Gutter; whilst Chalamel, dissecting
the turkey, said to the head clerk:

"What makes you think that the governor is mad?"

"We have a right to suppose he is perfectly beside himself when he
allows us forty sous a head for our daily breakfast."

"I confess that has surprised me as much as yourselves, gents. But that
is nothing--absolutely nothing--to what has just now occurred."

"Really?"

"What! has the unhappy old gent become so decidedly lunatic that he
insists on our dining at the Cadran Bleu every day at his expense?"

"Theatre in the evening?"

"Then coffee, with punch to follow?"

"And then--"

"Gents, laugh as much as you please; but the scene I have just witnessed
is rather alarming than pleasant."

"Well, then, relate this scene to us."

"Yes, do. Don't mind your breakfast," observed Chalamel; "we are all
ears."

"And jaws, my lads. I think I see you whilst I am talking working away
with your teeth; and the turkey would be finished before my tale. By
your leave, patience, and the story shall come in with the dessert."

Whether it was the spur of appetite or curiosity which incited the young
men we will not decide, but they went through their gastronomic
operation with such celerity that the moment for the head clerk's
history came in no time. In order that they might not be surprised by
their employer, they sent Hop-the-Gutter into the adjoining room as a
sentinel, having liberally supplied him with the carcass and drumsticks
of the bird.

The head clerk then said to his colleagues, "You must know, in the first
place, the porter has been very uneasy, for he has frequently seen M.
Ferrand, in spite of the cold and rain, pace the garden at night for a
considerable time. Once he ventured to ask his master if he wanted
anything; but he sent him about his business in such a manner that he
has not again ventured to intrude himself."

"Perhaps the governor is a sleep-walker?"

"That is not probable. But, to continue; a short time since I wanted his
signature to several papers. As I was turning the handle of his door, I
thought I heard some one speaking. I stopped, and made out two or three
repressed sounds, like stifled groans. After pausing an instant in fear,
I opened the door, and saw the governor kneeling on the floor, his
forehead buried in his hands, and his elbows resting on the seat of one
of his old armchairs."

"Oh, it's all plain enough: he has turned pious, and was saying an extra
prayer."

"Well, then, it was a strong prayer enough. I heard stifled groans, and
every now and then he murmured between his teeth '_Mon Dieu! mon Dieu!
mon Dieu!_' like a despairing man. Then,--and this is very singular,--in
a movement which he made as if to tear his breast with his nails, his
shirt came partly open, and I saw on his hairy chest a small red
pocketbook fastened around his neck by a steel chain. When I saw that I
did not really know whether I ought to retreat or advance. I remained,
however, very much embarrassed, when he rose and suddenly turned around,
holding between his teeth an old check pocket-handkerchief; his
spectacles were left on the chair. Let me say, gents, that I never in my
life saw such a figure; he looked like one of the damned. I retreated
really in alarm. Then he--"

"Seized you by the throat?"

"You are quite wrong. He looked at me first with a bewildered air; then
letting fall his handkerchief, he threw himself into my arms,
exclaiming, 'Oh, I am very unhappy!'"

"What a farce!"

"Well, but that did not prevent his voice--in spite of his death's-head
look--from being so distressing, I may say so imploring--"

"Imploring! Come, come, no gammon! Why, there is no night-owl with a
cold in her head which is not music to the governor's voice."

"That may be; but yet at this moment his voice was so plaintive that I
was almost affected. 'Sir,' I said to him, believe me--' 'Let me!--let
me!' replied he, interrupting me. 'It is so consoling to be able to say
to any one that we are suffering!' He evidently mistook me for some
other person. You may suppose that when he thus addressed me I felt sure
it was a mistake, or that he had a brain fever. I disengaged myself from
him, saying, 'Sir, compose yourself, it is I!' Then he looked at me with
a stupid air, and exclaimed, 'Who is it? Who's there? What do you want
with me?' And he passed, at each question, his hand over his brow, as if
to dispel the cloud which obscured his mind."

"Which obscured his mind! Capital! Well spoken! We'll get up a melodrama
amongst us!

    "'Methinks a man with such a power of words,
      Should try his hand at melodrame!'"

"Chalamel, will you be quiet?"

"What could ail the governor?"

"_Ma foi!_ How can I tell? But of this I'm sure, that when he recovers
he'll sing to another tune, for he frowned terribly, and said to me
sharply, without giving me time to reply, 'What did you come for? Have
you been here long? Am I to be surrounded with spies? What did I say?
Reply--answer!' _Ma foi!_ he looked so savage that I replied, 'I heard
nothing, sir; I only this moment entered.' 'You are not deceiving me?'
'No, sir.' 'Well, what do you want?' 'Some signatures, sir.' 'Give me
the papers!' And then he signed and signed--without reading--half a
dozen notarial deeds; he who never put his initials to a deed without
spelling it over word by word, and twice over from one end to the other.
I remarked that from time to time his hand relaxed in the middle of his
signature, as if he were absorbed in some fixed idea; then he went on
signing very quick, and, as it were, convulsively. When all were signed
he told me to retire, and I heard him descend the small staircase which
leads from his room to the courtyard."

"I still ask what can be the matter with him?"

"Gentlemen, it is perhaps Madame Séraphin whom he regrets."

"He? What, he regret any one?"

"Now I think of it, the porter said that the curé of Bonne Nouvelle and
the vicar had called several times to see the governor, and he was
denied to them. Is not that surprising?--they who almost lived here!"

"What puzzles me is to know what the workpeople are at."

"They have been working at the pavilion three days running."

"And one evening they brought furniture covered up with a carpet."

"Perhaps he feels remorse for having put Germain into prison?"

"Talking of Germain, he will have some fine recruits in his prison, poor
fellow! For I read in the _Gazette des Tribunaux_ that the band of
robbers and assassins, whom they seized in the Champs Elysées, in one of
the small underground public-houses, had been locked up in La Force."

"Poor Germain! What society for him!"

"Louise Morel, too, will have her share of the recruits; for in this
gang, they say, there is a whole family of thieves."

"Then they will send the women to St. Lazare, where Louise is?"

"Perhaps it was some of that gang who stabbed the countess, one of the
governor's clients. He has often sent me to inquire after the state of
this countess, and seems much interested in her recovery."

"Did they let you enter the house and see the spot where the
assassination was committed?"

"Oh, no! I could not go farther than the entrance; and the porter was
not at all a person inclined to talk."

"Gents, gents, take your places; here's the gov'nor coming up!" shouted
Hop-the-Gutter, coming into the office with the carcass still in his
hand.

The young men instantly took their seats at their respective desks, over
which they bent, handling their pens with great dexterity; whilst
Hop-the-Gutter deposited his turkey's skeleton in a box filled with law
papers.

Jacques Ferrand entered the room. His red hair, mingled with gray,
escaping from beneath an old black silk cap, fell in disorder down each
side of his temples. Some of the veins which marbled his head appeared
injected with blood, whilst his face, his flat nose, his furrowed
cheeks, were all of ghastly paleness. The expression of his look,
concealed by his large green spectacles, could not be seen; but the
great alteration in the man's features announced the ravages of a
consuming passion.

He crossed the office slowly, without saying a word to one of the
clerks, or without even appearing to notice that they were there; then
went into the room in which the chief clerk was employed, traversed it
as well as his own cabinet, and again instantly descended the small
staircase which led to the courtyard.

Jacques Ferrand having left all the doors open behind him, the clerks
had a right to be astonished at the strange demeanour of their employer,
who had come up one staircase and gone down another without pausing for
a moment in any of the apartments he had mechanically traversed.




CHAPTER IV.

AVOID TEMPTATION!


It is night. Profound silence reigns in the pavilion inhabited by
Jacques Ferrand, interrupted only at intervals by gusts of wind and the
dashing of rain, which falls in torrents. These melancholy sounds seemed
to render still more complete the solitude of this abode. In a
sleeping-room in the first floor, very nicely and newly furnished, and
covered with a thick carpet, a young female is standing up before a
fireplace, in which there is a cheerful blaze. It is strange, but in the
centre of the door, carefully bolted, and which is opposite to the bed,
is a small glass door, five or six inches square, which opens from the
outside. A small reflecting lamp casts a half shadow in this chamber,
hung with garnet-coloured paper; the curtains of the bed and the window,
as well as the cover of the large sofa, are of silk and woollen damask
of the same colour. We are precise in the details of this demi-luxury so
recently imported into the notary's residence, because it announces a
complete revolution in the habits of Jacques Ferrand, who, until now,
was of the most sordid avarice, and of Spartan disregard (especially as
it concerned others) to everything that respected comfortable existence.
It is on this garnet-coloured ground that was shadowed forth the figure
of Cecily, which we will now attempt to paint.

Tall and graceful, the creole was in the full flower of her age. Her
spreading shoulders and hips made her waist appear so singularly small
that it seemed as if it could be easily spanned. As simple as it was
coquettish, her Alsatian costume was of singular taste, somewhat
theatrical,--but for that reason more capable of producing the effect
she desired. Her bodice, of black cassimere, half open on her full
bosom, was very long-waisted, with tight sleeves, plain back, and
slightly embroidered with purple wool down the seams, perfected by a row
of small cut silver buttons. A short petticoat, of orange merino, which
seemed of vast fullness, descended little lower than the knee; her
stockings were of scarlet, with blue clocks, as we see them in the
drawings of the old Flemish painters, who so complacently show us the
garters of their robust heroines.

No artist ever drew more perfect legs than were those of Cecily:
symmetrical and slim beneath the swelling calf, they terminated in a
small foot, quite at ease, and yet restrained in a small slipper of
black morocco, with silver buckles. Cecily was looking into the glass
over the mantelpiece. The slope of her bodice displayed her elegant and
dimpled neck of dazzling but not transparent whiteness.

Taking off her cap of cherry-coloured velvet to replace it with a
kerchief, she displayed her thick, magnificent head of hair, of lustrous
black, which, divided over her brows, and naturally curling, came down
only to the necklace of Venus, which unites the neck and shoulders.

It is necessary to know the inimitable taste with which the Creoles
twist around their heads their kerchiefs of bright hues, to have an idea
of the graceful head-dress of Cecily, and the piquant contrast of this
variegated covering of purple, blue, and orange, with the black silky
tresses, which, escaping from beneath the tight fold of the
nightkerchief, surrounded her pale but round and firm cheeks. With her
two arms raised above her head, she proceeded with the ends of her
fingers, as slender as spindles of ivory, to arrange a large rosette,
placed very low on the left side, almost over the ear.

Cecily's features were such as once seen it is impossible ever to
forget. A bold forehead, somewhat projecting, surmounts her face, which
was a perfect oval; her pearly white complexion, the satiny freshness of
the camelia leaf slightly touched by a sun-ray; her eyes, of almost
disproportionate size, have a singular expression, for their irises,
extremely large, black, and brilliant, hardly allow the blue
transparency of the orbits, at the two extremities of the lids, fringed
with long lashes, to be visible; her chin is very distinctly prominent;
her nose, straight and thin, ends in two delicate nostrils, which dilate
on the least emotion; her mouth, insolent and amorous, is of bright
purple.

We must imagine this colourless countenance, with its bright black
glance, its two red, pulpy, and humid lips, which glisten like wet
coral. Such was Cecily. Her infamous instincts, at first repressed by
her real attachment for David, not being developed till she reached
Europe, civilisation and the influence of northern climates had tempered
their violence.

We have already said that Cecily had scarcely reached Germany, when,
first seduced by a man of desperately depraved habits, she, unknown to
David, who loved her with equal idolatry and blindness, exercised and
turned to account, for a considerable time, all her seductive powers;
but soon the scandal of her adventures was raised abroad, and such
exposures ensued that she was sentenced to perpetual imprisonment.

To all this let there be joined a plastic, adroit, insinuating mind, an
intelligence so wonderful that in a year she spoke French and German
with perfect ease, sometimes even with natural eloquence; then add a
corrupted heart worthy of the courtesan queen of ancient Rome, an
audacity and courage proof against everything, instincts of diabolical
wickedness, and then we may understand the new servant of Jacques
Ferrand, the resolute being who had dared to venture into the wolf's
den.

Yes, strange anomaly! On learning from M. de Graün the inciting and
platonic part she was to play with the notary, and what avenging ends
were to be derived from her seductions, Cecily had promised to go
through the character with love, or, rather, terrible hatred against
Jacques Ferrand, being sincerely indignant at the recital of the
infamous violence he had exercised against Louise,--a recital necessary
to be unfolded to the creole, to put her on her guard against the
hypocritical attempts of this monster. A few retrospective words as to
this latter are indispensable.

When Cecily was presented by Madame Pipelet as an orphan over whom she
did not desire to maintain any right, any control, the notary was,
perhaps, less smitten by the beauty of the creole than fascinated by her
irresistible look,--a look which, at the first interview, disturbed the
reason of Jacques Ferrand.

We have already said, in reference to the insensate boldness of some of
his words when conversing with Madame de Lucenay, that this man, usually
so completely master of himself, so calm, so cunning, so subtle, forgot
the cold calculations of his deep dissimulation when the demon of desire
darkened his better sense.

Besides, he had no cause to distrust the protégée of Madame Pipelet.
After her conversation with Alfred's spouse, Madame Séraphin had
proposed to Jacques Ferrand a young girl, almost destitute, to replace
Louise, and he had eagerly accepted the offer, in the hopes of taking
advantage of the isolated and precarious position of his new servant.
Moreover, far from being predisposed to mistrust, Jacques Ferrand found,
in the march of events, fresh motives for security.

All succeeded to his utmost wishes. The death of Madame Séraphin
released him from a dangerous accomplice; the death of Fleur-de-Marie
(he believed her dead) delivered him from a living proof of one of his
earliest crimes. Finally, thanks to the death of the Chouette, and the
unexpected murder of the Countess Macgregor (whose life was despaired
of), he no longer had these two women to fear, whose disclosures and
attacks might have been most disastrous to him.

The disposition, habits, and former life of Jacques Ferrand known and
displayed, the exciting beauty of the creole admitted, as we have
endeavoured to paint her, together with other facts we shall detail as
we proceed, will account, we presume, for the sudden passion, the
unbridled desire of the notary for this seductive and dangerous
creature. Then we must add, that if women of Cecily's stamp inspire
nothing but repugnance and disgust to men endued with tender and
elevated sentiments, with delicate and pure tastes, they exercise a
sudden action, a magic omnipotence, over men of brutal sensuality like
Jacques Ferrand. Thus a just, an avenging fatality, brought the creole
into contact with the notary, and a terrible expiation was beginning for
him. A fierce passion had urged him on to persecute, with pitiless
malice, an indigent and honest family, and to spread amongst them
misery, madness, and death. This passion was now to be the formidable
chastisement of this great culprit.

Although Jacques Ferrand was never to have his desires realised, the
creole took care not to deprive him of all hope; but the vague and
distant prospects she held out were so coloured by caprices that they
were an additional torture, and more completely enslaved him.

If we are astonished that a man of such vigour and audacity had not
recourse to stratagem or violence to triumph over the calculating
resistance of Cecily, we forget that Cecily was not a second Louise.
Besides, the day after her presentation to the notary, she had played
quite another part from that by aid of which she had been introduced to
her master, for he had not been the dupe of his servant two days.

Forewarned of the fate of Louise by the Baron de Graün, and knowing
besides by what abominable means she had become the prey of the notary,
the creole, on entering this solitary house, had taken excellent
precautions for passing her first night there in perfect security. The
evening of her arrival, being alone with Jacques Ferrand, he, in order
not to alarm her, pretended scarcely to look at her, and rudely ordered
her to bed. She told him, _naïvely_, that she was afraid of thieves in
the night, but that she was resolute, and capable of defending herself;
at the same time drawing from her large woollen pelisse a small but
exceedingly keen stiletto, the sight of which set the notary thinking.

Believing that Cecily was afraid of robbers only, he showed her to the
late chamber of Louise; after having examined it, Cecily said,
trembling, she would sleep in a chair, because the door had neither lock
nor bolt. Jacques Ferrand, unwilling to compromise himself by rousing
Cecily's suspicions, promised a bolt should be fixed. The creole did not
go to bed.

In the morning the notary sent to her to show her how to set about her
work. He had promised himself to preserve for the first few days a
hypocritical reserve with respect to his new servant, in order to
inspire her with confidence; but smitten by her beauty, which by
daylight was even more striking, blinded, maddened by his desires, which
already got the better of him, he stammered out some compliments as to
the figure and beauty of Cecily. She, with keen sagacity, had judged
that, from her first interview with the notary, he was completely caught
in her spells; at the confession he made of his flame, she thought it
policy to cast aside at once her feigned timidity, and, as we have said,
to change her mask. The creole suddenly assumed a bold air. Jacques
Ferrand again complimented her beauty and her graceful figure.

"Look at me well!" said Cecily to him, in a bold tone. "Although I am
dressed as an Alsatian peasant, do I look like a servant?"

"What do you mean?" cried Jacques Ferrand.

"Look at this hand, does it appear accustomed to hard labour?" and she
presented a white, delicate hand, with long and slender fingers, with
nails as rosy and polished as agate, but whose root, slightly browned,
betrayed the creole blood. "And this foot, is it that of a servant?" and
she protruded a beautiful small foot, coquettishly shod, which the
notary had not before remarked, and from which he only removed his eyes
to gaze on Cecily with amazement. "I told my Aunt Pipelet what story I
chose; she knew nothing of my former life, and believes me reduced to my
present condition through the death of my parents, and takes me for a
servant,--but you, I hope, have too much sagacity to show her error,
dear master."

"Who, then, are you?" exclaimed Jacques Ferrand, more and more surprised
at her language.

"That is my secret. For reasons best known to myself I was obliged to
quit Germany in this attire. I wished to remain concealed in Paris for
some time, being as secluded as possible. My aunt, supposing me reduced
to misery, proposed to me your service, telling me of the solitary life
which I must of compulsion lead in your house, informing me that I
should never have leave to quit it. I accepted the offer
unhesitatingly,--without knowing it my aunt had anticipated my most
earnest desire. Who would think of looking for and finding me here?"

"And what have you done to compel you to seek concealment?"

"Agreeable sins, perhaps; but that is, also, my secret."

"And what are your intentions, mademoiselle?"

"What they always have been. But for your significant compliments as to
my shape and beauty, perhaps I should not have confessed so much to you;
although, no doubt, your clear-sightedness would, sooner or later, have
induced my confession. Now listen to me, my dear master. I have for the
moment accepted the condition--or, rather, the character--of a servant;
circumstances compelled me. I have courage enough to sustain the
character to the end, and will risk all the consequences. I will serve
you with zeal, activity, and respect, in order to retain my situation,
that is to say, a sure and unknown asylum. But on the least word of
gallantry, the least liberty you take with me, I will leave you,--not
from prudery, there is nothing of the prude about me, I fancy." And she
darted a look at the notary which had full effect. "No, I am no prude!"
she continued, with a provoking smile, which displayed her teeth of
dazzling whiteness. "Indeed, no, when I love, I do love! But be
discreet, and you will see that your unworthy servant has no desire but
honestly to discharge her duty as a servant.

"Now you have my secret, or, at least, a portion of it. But should you,
by any chance, desire to act as a gentleman, should you find me too
handsome to serve you, should you like to change parts, and become my
slave, be it so! Frankly speaking, I should prefer it, and had rather
you should feel paternally disposed towards me. That would not prevent
you from saying that you found me charming; this will be the recompense
of your devotion and discretion."

"The only one? The only one?" stammered Jacques Ferrand.

"The only one, unless solitude make me mad,--which is impossible, for
you will keep me company. Come, make up your mind,--no ambiguity. I
either serve you, or you shall serve me; if not, I leave your house, and
beg my aunt to find me another place. All this may, perhaps, appear
strange to you; but if you take me for an adventuress, without any means
of existence, you are wrong. In order that my aunt should be my
accomplice without knowing it, I have made her believe that I was so
poor that I could not purchase any other garments than those I now wear.
I have, however, as you see, a tolerably well filled purse; on this side
gold, on the other diamonds" (and Cecily displayed before the notary's
eyes a long, red silk purse, filled with gold, and through the meshes of
which he could also see several sparkling gems). "Unfortunately all the
money in the world could not purchase for me a retreat so secure as your
house,--so isolated, from the very solitude in which you live. Accept,
then, one or other of my offers, and you will do me a kindness. You see
I place myself almost at your discretion; for to say to you, I conceal
myself, is to say to you I am sought for. But I am sure you will not
betray me, even if you could."

This romantic confidence, this sudden change of character, completely
upset all Jacques Ferrand's ideas. Who was this woman? Why did she
conceal herself? Was it chance alone that had brought her to him? If she
came with some secret aim, what could it be? Amongst all the ideas which
this singular adventure gave rise to in the notary's mind, the real
motive of the creole's presence did not occur to him. He had not, or,
rather, he believed he had no other enemies than the victims of his
licentiousness and his cupidity, and all these were in such miserable
circumstances that he could not suspect them capable of spreading any
net for him, of which Cecily should be the bait.

And then, moreover, what could be the motive of any such snare? No, the
sudden transformation of Cecily inspired Jacques Ferrand with one fear
only--he believed that this woman did not tell the truth, and was,
perhaps, an adventuress, who, thinking him rich, had introduced herself
into his house to wheedle and get money from him, and, perhaps, induce
him to marry her. But although his avarice at once revolted at this
idea, he perceived (and trembled) that his suspicions and reflections
were too late, for he might by one word have calmed his distrust by
sending away this woman from his house,--but this word he could not say.

These thoughts hardly occupied him a moment, so fascinated had he
become. He already loved, after his own fashion, and the idea of being
separated from this enchanting creature seemed impossible; and he felt
also a jealousy, which made him say to himself, "So long as she is
immured in my house, she can have no other lover." The boldness of her
language, the wantonness of her look, the freedom of her manner, all
revealed that she was not (as she had said) a prude. This conviction,
giving vague hopes to the notary, still more assured Cecily's empire. In
a word, Jacques Ferrand's passion choking the calm voice of reason, he
blindly resigned himself to all that might result.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was agreed that Cecily should only be the servant in appearance; thus
there would be no scandal. Besides, in order the more completely to
render his guest at her ease, he was not to engage any other servant,
but make up his mind to wait on her and on himself. The meals were
brought from a neighbouring tavern, the porter swept out and attended to
the office, and he paid for his clerks' breakfast. Then the notary would
furnish at once an apartment on the first floor, as Cecily wished. She
desired to pay for it, but he refused, and spent two thousand francs
(80_l._). This was enormous generosity, and proved the unheard-of
violence of his passion.

Then began the terrible life of this miserable wretch. Enclosed in the
impenetrable solitude of this house, inaccessible to all, more and more
under the galling yoke of his mad love, careless of penetrating the
secret of this singular woman; from a master he was made a slave,--he
was Cecily's valet, served her at meal-times, and took care of her
apartment. Forewarned by the baron that Louise had been overcome by a
narcotic, the creole drank only pure water, eating only of dishes with
which it was impossible to tamper. She had selected the apartment she
was to occupy, assuring herself that there was there no concealed
entrance. Besides, Jacques Ferrand soon discovered that Cecily was not a
woman whom he could assail with impunity; she was vigorous, agile, and
dangerously armed; thus a frenzied delirium alone could have incited him
to attempt force, and she was quite protected from this peril.

Yet, that she might not weary and utterly repulse the notary's passion,
the creole seemed sometimes touched by his assiduities, and flattered by
the control which she exercised over him. And, perceiving that he hoped,
by dint of proofs of devotion and self-denial, he should contrive to
make her overlook his age and ugliness, she amused herself with telling
him that, if she ever could love him, how excessive that love would be.
With this Jacques Ferrand's reason wandered, and he would frequently
walk in his garden at night absorbed in his own reflections. Sometimes
he gazed for hours into the bedroom of the creole; for she had allowed a
small window to be made in the door, which she frequently and
intentionally left open. Absorbed, lost, wandering, indifferent to his
most important interests, or the preservation of his reputation as an
austere, serious, and pious man,--a reputation usurped, it is true, but,
at the same time, acquired after long years of dissimulation and
chicanery,--he amazed his clerks by his aberration of mind, offended his
clients by his refusals to receive them, and abruptly refused the visits
of the priests, who, deceived by his hypocrisy, had been until then his
warmest champions.

We have said that Cecily was dressing her head before her glass. At a
slight noise in the corridor she turned her head towards the door. In
spite of the noise she had heard, Cecily continued her night toilet
tranquilly. She drew from her corsage, where it was placed almost like a
busk, a stiletto five or six inches long, enclosed in a case of black
shagreen, having a small ebony handle, with silver threads,--a plain
handle, but very fit for use; it was not a mere weapon for show. Cecily
took the dagger from its scabbard with excessive precaution, and laid it
on the marble mantelpiece. The blade, of finest temper and Damascus
steel, was triangular, with keen edges; and the point, as sharp as a
needle, would have pierced a shilling without turning the edge.
Impregnated with a subtle and rapid poison, the slightest puncture of
this poniard was mortal. Jacques Ferrand having one day alluded to the
danger of this weapon, the creole made in his presence an experiment,
_in animâ vita_,--that is to say, on the unfortunate house-dog, which,
slightly pricked on the nose, fell and died in horrible convulsions. The
stiletto placed on the mantelpiece, Cecily took off her black bodice,
and was then, with her shoulders, neck, and arms denuded, like a lady in
her ball-dress. Like most of the creole women, she wore, instead of
stays, another bodice of stout linen, which fitted her figure very
closely; her orange-coloured petticoat, remaining attached to this sort
of white spencer, with short sleeves, and cut very low, formed a costume
less precise than the other, and harmonised wonderfully with the scarlet
stocking, and the coloured handkerchief, so coquettishly arranged around
the creole's head. Nothing could be more perfect, more beautifully
defined, than the graceful contour of her arms and shoulders. A heavy
sigh aroused Cecily's attention. She smiled, as she twisted around her
finger one of her curling tresses, which had escaped from beneath her
head-dress.

"Cecily! Cecily!" murmured a voice, which was plaintive though coarse.
And through the wicket was visible the pale and flat face of Jacques
Ferrand.

Cecily, silent until then, began to hum a creole air; the words of this
melody were sweet and expressive. Although repressed, the full
contra-alto of Cecily was heard above the noise of the torrents of the
rain and gusts of wind, which seemed to shake the old house to its very
foundation.

"Cecily! Cecily!" repeated Jacques Ferrand, in a tone of supplication.

The creole paused suddenly and turned her head around quickly, as if,
for the first time, she then heard the notary's voice; and going towards
the door,--

"What, dear master (she called him so in derision), you there?" she
said, with a slight foreign accent, which gave additional charm to her
full and sarcastic voice.

"Oh, how beautiful you are!" murmured the notary.

"You think so?" said Cecily. "Doesn't my head-dress become me?"

"I think you handsomer every day."

"Only see how white my arm is."

"Monster, begone! Begone!" shouted Jacques Ferrand, furious.

Cecily burst into a loud fit of laughter.

"No, no, it is too much to suffer! Oh, if I were not afraid of death!"
said the notary, gloomily. "But to die is to renounce you altogether,
and you are so beautiful! I would rather, then, suffer--and look at
you."

"Look at me? Why, that's what the wicket was made for; and so we can
thus chat, like two friends in our solitude, which really is not irksome
to me, you are such a good master! What a dangerous confession I make
through the door!"

"Will you never open this door? You see how submissive I am; this
evening I might have tried to enter into your chamber with you, but I
did not do so."

"You are submissive for two reasons: in the first place, because you
know that, having, from the necessity of my wandering life, always had
the precaution to carry a stiletto, I can manage with a strong hand this
inestimable jewel, whose tooth is sharper than a viper's; and you know,
too, that, from the day in which I have to complain of you, I will quit
this roof for ever, leaving you a thousand times more enamoured than
ever,--since you have so greatly honoured your unworthy servant as to
say that you are enamoured of her."

"My servant? It is I who am your slave,--your mocked, derided, despised
slave!"

"That's true enough."

"And yet it does not move you?"

"It amuses me; the days, and especially the nights, are so long!"

"Accursed creature!"

"But, seriously, you look so perfectly wretched, your features have so
sensibly altered, that I am quite flattered at it. It is a poor triumph,
but you are the only one here."

"To hear that, and me consume in impotent rage!"

"Have you really any understanding? Why, I never said anything more
tender."

"Jeer at me,--jeer at me!"

"I do not jeer. I never before saw a man of your age in love after your
fashion; and, I must confess, a young and handsome man would be
incapable of these outrageous passions. An Adonis admires himself as
much as he admires us; he likes us, and we choose to notice
him,--nothing more simple. He has a claim to our love, but is hardly
grateful; but to show favour to a man like you, my master dear, would be
to take him from earth to heaven, to fulfil his wildest dreams, his most
insensate hopes. For if some being were to say to you, 'You love Cecily
to distraction, if I chose she should be yours next minute,' you would
suppose such a being endued with supernatural power, shouldn't you,
master dear?"

"Yes! Ah, yes!"

"Well, if you could convince me more satisfactorily of your passion, I
might, perchance, have the whimsical fancy to enact this supernatural
part myself in your favour. Do you comprehend?"

"I comprehend that you are still fooling me,--that you are still
pitiless."

"Perhaps,--for solitude creates so many singular fancies."

Until this moment Cecily's accent had been sarcastic, but she pronounced
these last words with a serious, reflecting tone, and accompanied them
with a look which made the notary start.

"Silence! Do not look at me thus,--you will drive me mad! I would rather
you denied me,--at least, I could then hate you,--drive you from my
house!" cried Jacques Ferrand, who again gave himself up to a vain hope.
"Yes, for I should then hope nothing from you. But, misery! Misery! I
know you well enough now to hope, in spite of myself, that one day I
might, from your very hate or proud caprice, obtain what I shall never
owe to your love. You bid me convince you of my passion,--do you not see
how unhappy I am? I will do all I can to please you. You desire to, be
concealed from all eyes, and from all eyes I conceal you, perchance at
the risk of compromising myself most seriously; for, indeed, I know not
who you are. I respect your secret,--I never speak to you of it. I have
interrogated you as to your past life, and you have given me no answer."

"Well, then, I was very wrong. I'll give you a mark of blind confidence,
oh, master, dear! And so, listen."

"Another bitter jest, no doubt."

"No, a serious tale. You ought, at least, to know the life of her to
whom you afford such generous hospitality." Then Cecily continued, in a
tone of hypocritical and lachrymose earnestness, "Daughter of a brave
soldier, brother of my Aunt Pipelet, I received an education, beyond my
condition. I was seduced, and then abandoned, by a rich young gentleman;
then, to escape the anger of my father, whose notions of honour were
most strict, I fled my native country." Then bursting into a loud fit of
laughter, Cecily added, "Now I hope that's what you call a very pretty
and particularly probable tale, for it has been very often told. Amuse
your curiosity with that until you get hold of some other story more
interesting."

"I was certain it was some cruel jest," said the notary, with
concentrated rage; "nothing touches you,--nothing. What must I do? Tell
me. I serve you like the lowest footboy, for you I neglect my dearest
interests,--I no longer know what I do. I am a subject of astonishment
and derision to my own clerks; my clients hesitate any longer to entrust
me with their affairs; I have severed my connection with some religious
persons whom I knew intimately. I dare not think of what the world will
say of my change of demeanour and habits. But you do not know,--no, you
do not know the fatal consequences my mad passion for you may entail on
me. Yet I give you ample proof of my devotion. Will you have more?
Speak! Is it gold you would have? They think me richer than I am, but
I--"

"What could I do with your gold?" asked Cecily, interrupting the notary,
and shrugging her shoulders; "living in this chamber, what is the use of
gold? Your invention is at fault."

"It is no fault of mine if you are a prisoner. Is this chamber
displeasing to you? Will you have one more splendid? Speak! Order!"

"Once more, what is the use? What is the use? Oh, if I might here
expect a beloved one, full of the love he inspires and participates, I
would have gold, silks, flowers, perfumes, all the wonders of luxury;
nothing could be too sumptuous, too enchanting to enshrine my love,"
said Cecily, with an impassioned voice.

"Well, these wonders of luxury, say but a word, and--"

"What's the use? What's the use? Why make a frame for which there is no
picture? And the adored one! Where is he,--where is he, master, dear?"

"True," exclaimed the notary, with bitterness, "I am old, I am ugly, I
can only inspire disgust and aversion. She overwhelms me with contempt,
jests at me,--and yet I have not the resolution, the power to send her
away. I have only the resolution to suffer!"

"Oh, silly old mourner! And what an absurd elderly gentleman, with his
sufferings!" cried Cecily, in a contemptuous and sarcastic tone; "he
only knows how to groan, to despair,--and yet he has been for ten days
shut up alone with a young woman in a lone house."

"But this woman scorns me,--this woman is armed,--this woman is shut
up!" groaned the notary, furiously.

"Well, conquer her scorn, make the dagger fall from her hands, compel
her to open the door which separates her from yourself! But not by brute
force, that would be useless."

"How, then?"

"By the strength of your passion."

"Passion! And can I inspire it?"

"Why, you are nothing but a lawyer, affecting piety,--I really pity you.
Is it for me to teach you your part? You are ugly,--be terrible, and one
may forget your ugliness. You are old,--be energetic, and one may forget
your age. You are repulsive,--become menacing. Since you cannot be the
noble steed that neighs proudly in the midst of his harem, do not
become the stupid camel that bends the knee and offers his back; be the
tiger! The old tiger, that roars in the midst of carnage, still excites
admiration; his tigress responds to him from the deepest recesses of the
desert."

At this language, which was not deficient in a sort of natural and hardy
eloquence, Jacques Ferrand shuddered; struck by the expression, wild and
almost fierce, which Cecily's features displayed, as, with her bosom
palpitating, her nostrils open, her mouth defying, she fastened on him
her large and brilliant black eyes. Never had she seemed to him more
fascinating, or more resplendently beautiful than at this moment.

"Speak,--speak again!" he exclaimed, with excitement. "For now you speak
in earnest. Oh, if I could--"

"One can do what one wishes," replied Cecily, sternly.

"But--"

"But I tell you, old as you are, if I were in your place I would
undertake to engage the affections of a young and handsome woman, and
once having achieved this result, what had been against me would turn to
my advantage. What pride, what triumph to say to oneself, I have made my
age and ugliness forgotten! The love that is shown me I do not owe to
pity, but to my spirit, my courage, and my skill. Yes, and now if there
were here some handsome young fellows, brilliant with grace and
attractions, the lovely woman, whom I have subdued by proofs of a
resistless and unbounded devotion, would not deign to cast a look at
them. No; for she would know that these elegant effeminates would fear
to compromise the tie of their cravat, or a curl of their hair, in
obedience to her caprices; whilst if she cast her handkerchief in the
midst of flames, on a signal from her her old tiger would rush into the
furnace with a roar of ecstasy."

"Yes, I would do it! Try! Try!" exclaimed Jacques Ferrand, more and more
excited.

Cecily continued drawing nearer to the aperture, and fixing on Jacques
Ferrand a steadfast and penetrating look.

"For this woman would well know," continued the creole, "that she would
have some exorbitant caprice to satisfy,--that these dandies would look
at their money, if they had any, or, if they had not, at some other low
consideration, whilst her old tiger--"

"Would consider nothing,--nothing, I tell you.
Fortune,--honour,--he--he--would sacrifice all!"

"Really?" said Cecily, putting her lovely fingers on the bony fingers of
Jacques Ferrand, whose clutched hands, passed through the small glass
door, were clasping the top of the ledge. "Would not this woman be
ardently loved?" added Cecily. "If she had an enemy, and with a gesture
pointed him out to her old tiger, and said to him, Strike--"

"And he would strike!" exclaimed Jacques Ferrand, attempting to press
Cecily's fingers with his parched lips.

"Really, the old tiger would strike?" said the creole, placing her hand
gently on the hand of Jacques Ferrand.

"To possess you," cried the wretch, "I could commit a crime--"

"Ah, master," said Cecily, suddenly, and withdrawing her hand,
"go--go,--in my turn I scarcely know you,--you do not seem to me so ugly
as you did just now. But go--go!" and she left the aperture abruptly.

The artful creature gave to her gestures and these last words an
appearance of truth so perfect, and a look of such surprise, as if angry
and disappointed with herself for having for an instant only appeared to
forget the ugliness of Jacques Ferrand, that he, transported by frenzied
hope, cried, as he clung convulsively to the ledge of the aperture:

"Cecily, come back,--come back! Bid me do what you will, I will be your
tiger."

"No, no, master!" said Cecily, still retreating. "And in order to forget
you, I will sing a song of my country."

"Cecily, return!" exclaimed Jacques Ferrand, in a supplicating tone.

"No, no! Later, when I can without danger. But the light of this lamp
hurts my eyes,--a soft languor overcomes my senses!" and Cecily
extinguished the lamp, took down a guitar, and made up the fire, whose
increased blaze then lighted up the whole apartment.

From the narrow window, where he stood motionless, such was the picture
that Jacques Ferrand perceived. In the midst of the luminous circle
formed by the flickering blaze on the fire Cecily, in a position full of
softness and _abandonnement_, half reclining on a large sofa of garnet
damask, held a guitar, on which she ran over several harmonious
preludes. The fire-light threw its red tints on the creole, who appeared
thus in strong relief. To complete the tableau, the reader must call to
mind the mysterious and singular appearance of a room in which the fire
from the grate struggles with the deep and large black shadows, which
tremble on the ceiling and the walls. The storm without increased, and
roared loudly.

Whilst she preludised on her guitar, Cecily fixed her eyes immovably on
Jacques Ferrand, who, fascinated, could not take his look from her.

"Now, master mine," said the creole, "listen to a song of my country. We
do not understand how to make verses, but have a simple recitative,
without rhyme, and between each rest we improvise, as well as we can, a
symphony appropriate to the idea of the couplet; it is very simple and
pastoral, and I am sure, master, it will please you."

And Cecily began a kind of recitative, much more accentuated by the
expression of the voice than the modulation of the music. Some soft and
vibrating chords served as accompaniment. This was Cecily's song:

    "Flowers--still flowers, everywhere.
    My lover is coming--my hope of happiness unnerves me.
    Let us subdue the glare of daylight, pleasure seeks the softer
        shade.
    My lover prefers my breath to the perfume of the sweetest
        flowers.
    The brightness of day will not affect his eyelids, for my kisses
        will keep them closed.
    Come--come--come--come, love! Come--come--come!"

These words, uttered with animation, as if the creole was addressing an
unseen lover, were rendered by her the theme of a delicious melody; her
charming fingers produced from the guitar, an instrument of no great
power, vibrations full of harmony. The impassioned look of Cecily, her
half closed, humid eyes fastened on Jacques Ferrand, were full of the
expression of expectation. Words of love, delicious music, together
conspired at the moment to bereave Jacques Ferrand of his reason; and,
half frenzied, he exclaimed:

"Mercy, Cecily, mercy! You will drive me distracted! Oh, be silent, or I
die! Oh, that I were mad!"

"Listen to the second couplet, master," said the creole, again touching
the chords; and she thus continued her impassioned recitative:

    "If my lover were here, and his hand touched my bare shoulder, I
        should tremble and die.
    If he were here, and his curly hair touched my cheek, my pale
        cheek would become purple--my pale cheek would be on fire.
    Soul of my Soul, if thou wert here, my parched lips would not
        utter a word.
    Life of my Life, if thou wert here, I should expiring ask thy
        pardon.
    'Tis sweet to die for and with those we love.
    Angel, come--come to my heart--come--come--come!"

If the creole had rendered the first strophe with languid pleasure, she
put in her last words all the enthusiasm of antique love; and as if the
music had been powerless to express her intense passion, she threw her
guitar from her, and, half rising and extending her arms towards the
door, where Jacques Ferrand stood, she repeated, in a faltering, dying
tone, "Oh, come--come--come!" It would be impossible to depict the
electric look with which she accompanied these words. Jacques Ferrand
uttered a terrible cry.

"Oh, death! Death to him whom you could thus love!" he cried, shaking
the door in a burst of jealousy and furious rage.

Agile as a panther, Cecily was at the door with one bound; and, as if
she with difficulty repressed her feigned transports, she said to
Jacques Ferrand, in a low, concentrated, palpitating voice:

"Well, then, I will confess I am excited by my song. I did not mean to
approach the door again, yet here I am, in spite of myself; for I hear
still the words you said just now, 'If you bade me strike, I would
strike.' You love me, then?"

"Will you have gold,--all my gold?"

"No, I have enough."

"Have you an enemy? I will kill him."

"I have no enemy."

"Will you be my wife? I'll marry you."

"I am married."

"What would you, then? Oh, what would you?"

"Prove to me that your passion for me is blind,--furious! And that you
would sacrifice all to it."

"Ah!--yes--all. But how?"

"I do not know,--but a moment since your eyes fascinated me. If again
you give me one of those marks of intense love, which excite the
imagination of a woman to madness, I know not of what I should not be
capable. Make haste, then, for I am capricious, and to-morrow, perhaps,
all the impression will be effaced."

"But what proof can I give you at this moment?" cried the notary.

"You are but a fool, after all!" replied Cecily, retreating from the
aperture with an air of disdain. "I was deceived,--I believed you
capable of energetic devotion. Goodnight! It's a pity!"

"Cecily, do not leave me! Return! What can I do?"

"I was but too much disposed to listen to you; you will never have such
another opportunity."

"But oh, tell me what you would have!" cried the notary, half mad.

"Eh! If you were as passionately in love as you say, you would find
means to persuade me. Good night!"

"Cecily."

"I will shut the door, instead of opening it."

"Cecily,--listen! I will give you yet another proof of my devotion."

"What is this proof of your love?" said the creole, who, having
approached the mantelpiece to resume her dagger, returned slowly towards
the door, lighted by the flame of the hearth. Then, unobserved by the
notary, she made sure of the action of an iron chain, which terminated
in two small knobs, one of which was screwed into the door, and the
other into the door-post.

"Listen!" said Jacques Ferrand, in a hoarse and broken voice, "listen!
If I place my honour, my fortune, my life, at your mercy,--now, this
very instant,--will you then believe I love you?"

"Your honour, your fortune, your life! I do not comprehend you."

"If I confide to you a secret which may bring me to the scaffold, will
you then believe me?"

"You a criminal? You do but jest. What, then, of your austere
life,--your piety,--your honesty?"

"All--all a lie!"

"You pass for a saint, and yet you boast of these iniquities! No, there
is no man so craftily skilful, so fortunately bold, as thus to captivate
the confidence and respect of men; that were, indeed, a fearful defiance
cast in the teeth of society!"

"I am that man,--I have cast that sarcasm, that defiance, in the face of
society!" exclaimed the monster, in a tone of ecstatic pride.

"Jacques! Jacques! Do not speak thus!" said Cecily, with a tone of
emotion. "You make me mad!"

"My head for your love,--will you have it so?"

"Ah, this, indeed, is love! Here, take my poniard,--you disarm me!"

Jacques Ferrand took, through the wicket, the dangerous weapon, with due
precaution, and flung it from him to a distance in the corridor.

"Cecily, you believe me, then!" he exclaimed with transport.

"Do I believe you?" said the creole, energetically pressing her
beautiful fingers on the clasped hands of Jacques Ferrand. "Oh, yes, I
do! For now, again, you look as you did a short time since, when my very
soul seemed fascinated by your gaze."

"Cecily, you will speak the words of, truth--and truth only--to me?"

"And can you doubt it for a moment? Ah, you will soon have ample proof
of my sincerity. But what you are about to tell me is quite true,--is it
not?"

"I repeat that you may believe each word I utter."

"So much the better, since you are enabled to prove your passion by the
avowal of them."

"And if I tell you all?"

"Then will I, in return, withhold nothing from you; for if, indeed, you
have this blind, this courageous confidence in me, Jacques, I will call
no more for the ideal lover of my song, but you,--my hero, my tiger! to
whom I will sing, 'Come--come--oh, come!'"

As Cecily uttered these words, with an air and voice of seductive
tenderness, she drew so close to the wicket that Jacques Ferrand could
feel the hot breath of the creole pass over his cheek, while her fresh,
full lip lightly touched his coarse, vulgar hand. "Call me your
tiger,--your slave,--what you will,--and if after that you but divulge
what I entrust to you, my life will be the consequence. Yes,
enchantress, a word from you, and I perish on a scaffold. My honour,
reputation, nay, my very existence, are henceforward in your hands."

"Your honour?"

"Yes, even so. But listen. About ten years ago I was entrusted with the
care of a child, and a sum of money for her use, amounting to two
hundred thousand francs; well, I wronged the little creature by
spreading a false report of her death, and then appropriated the money
to my own purposes."

"It was boldly and cleverly done! Who would ever have believed you
capable of such conduct?"

"Again. I had a cashier whom I detested, and I determined upon ruining
him one way or other. Well, one evening, under some great emergency, he
took from my cash-box a trifling amount of gold, which he paid back the
next day; but to wreak my malice on the object of my dislike, I accused
him of having stolen a large sum. Of course my testimony was believed,
and the wretched man was thrown into prison. Now is not my honour--my
very safety--at your will and pleasure? At your word both would be in
peril."

"Then you love me, Jacques,--oh, truly, blindly love me! Since you thus
surrender to me the most precious secrets of your heart, how plainly
does it prove the empire I must have over you! Ah, believe me, I will
not be niggardly in repaying you. Stoop that brow, from which have
emanated so many infernal schemes, that I may press it with my lips."

"Were the scaffold erected for me," cried the excited notary, "did death
stare me in the face, I would not now recall my words. But hearken to
what I have still to confess. The child I formerly wronged and forsook
has again crossed my path, her reappearance disquieted me, and I have
had her murdered."

"Murdered! and by your orders? But how--in what manner?"

"A few days since; it occurred thus: Near the bridge of Asnières, at the
Isle du Ravageur, a man named Martial, for a bribe, contrived to sink
her in a boat made purposely with a false bottom. Are these particulars
sufficient? Will you believe me now?"

"Oh, fiend! demon! You terrify while you fascinate me! In what consists
your marvellous power and influence?"

"But listen further, for I have not yet finished my catalogue of crimes.
Previously to that a man had entrusted me with one hundred thousand
crowns. I contrived to waylay and blow out his brains, making it appear
he had fallen by his own hand. Afterwards, when his sister claimed the
money entrusted to my charge, I denied all knowledge of it. Now, then, I
have proclaimed myself a malefactor, guilty of every crime. Will you not
open your door, and admit a lover so ardent, so impatient as myself?"

"Jacques," exclaimed the creole, with much excitement, "I
admire,--love,--nay, adore you!"

"Let a thousand deaths come!" cried the notary, in a state of
enthusiastic delight impossible to describe, "I will brave them all! Oh,
you are right! Were I ever so young, so handsome, or so seducing, I
could not hope for joy such as now swells my heart. But delay not,
charmer of my soul,--give me the key, or yourself undo the bolts which
separate us. I can endure this torturing suspense no longer!"

The creole took from the lock, which she had carefully secured
beforehand, the key so ardently prayed for, and, handing it to the
notary through the aperture, said, in a languishing tone of utter
abandonnement:

"Jacques, my senses seem forsaking me,--my brain is on fire,--I know not
what I do or say."

"You are mine, then, at length, my adorable beauty!" cried he, with a
wild shout of savage exultation, and hastily turning the key in the
lock. But the firmly bolted door yielded not yet.

"Come, beloved of my heart!" murmured Cecily, in a languid voice; "bless
me with your presence,--come!"

"The bolt! The bolt!" gasped out Jacques Ferrand, breathless with his
exertions to force open the door.

"But what if you have been deceiving me?" cried the creole, as though a
sudden thought had seized her; "if you have only invented the secrets
with which you affect to entrust me, to mock at my credulity, to ensnare
my confidence?"

The notary appeared thunderstruck with surprise at this fresh expression
of doubt, at the very moment when he believed himself upon the point of
attaining his wishes; to find a new obstacle arise when he considered
success certain drove him almost furious. He rapidly thrust his hand
into his breast, opened his waistcoat, impatiently snapped a steel
chain, to which was suspended a small red morocco pocketbook, took it,
and showing it to Cecily, through the aperture, cried, in a thick,
palpitating voice:

"This book contains papers that would bring me to a scaffold; only undo
the bolts which deny me entrance to your presence, and this book, with
all its precious documents, is yours."

"Oh, then, let us seal the compact!" exclaimed Cecily, as, drawing back
the bolt with as much noise as possible with one hand, with the other
she seized the pocketbook.

But Jacques Ferrand permitted it not to leave his possession till he
felt the door yield to his pressure. But though it partially gave way,
it was but to leave an opening about half a foot wide, the solid chain
which passed across it above the lock preventing any person's entering
as completely as before. At this unexpected obstacle Jacques Ferrand
precipitated himself against the door and shook it with desperate fury,
while Cecily, with the rapidity of thought, took the pocket-book between
her teeth, opened the window, threw a large cloak out into the yard
below, and, light and agile as bold and daring, seized a knotted cord
previously secured to the balcony, and glided from her chamber on the
first floor to the court beneath, descending with the swiftness of an
arrow shot from a bow. Then wrapping herself hastily in the mantle, she
flew to the porter's lodge, opened the door, drew up the string, ran
into the street, and sprang into a hackney-coach, which, ever since
Cecily had been with Jacques Ferrand, came regularly every evening, in
case of need, by Baron Graün's orders, and took up its station a short
distance from the notary's house. Directly she had entered the vehicle
it drove off at the topmost speed of the two strong, powerful horses
that drew it, and had reached the Boulevards ere Jacques Ferrand had
even discovered Cecily's flight.

We will now return to the disappointed wretch. From the situation of the
door he was unable to perceive the window by which the creole had
contrived to prepare and make good her flight; but concentrating all his
powers, by a vigorous application of his brawny shoulders Jacques
Ferrand succeeded in forcing out the chain which kept the door from
opening.

With furious impatience he rushed into the chamber,--it was empty. The
knotted cord was still suspended to the balcony of the window from which
he leaned; and then, at the other extremity of the courtyard, he saw by
means of the moon, which just then shone out from behind the stormy
clouds which had hitherto obscured it, the dim outline of the outer gate
swinging to and fro as though left open by some person having hastily
passed through. Then did Jacques Ferrand divine the whole of the scheme
so successfully laid to entrap him; but a glimmer of hope still
remained. Determined and vigorous, he threw his leg over the balcony,
let himself down in his turn by the cord, and hastily quitted the house.

The street was quite deserted,--not a creature was to be seen; and the
only sound his ear could detect was the distant rumbling of the wheels
of the vehicle that bore away the object of his search. The notary, who
supposed it to be the carriage of some person whose business or pleasure
took them late from home, paid no attention to this circumstance.

There was then no chance of finding Cecily, whose absence was the more
disastrous, as she carried with her the positive proof of his crimes. As
this fearful certainty came over him, he fell, struck with
consternation, on a bench placed against his door, where he long
remained, mute, motionless, and as though petrified with horror. His
eyes fixed and haggard, his teeth clenched, and his lips covered with
foam, tearing his breast, as though unconsciously, till the blood
streamed from it, he felt his very brain dizzy with thought, till his
ideas were lost in a fathomless abyss.

When he recovered from his stupor he arose and staggered onwards with an
unsteady and faltering step, like a person just aroused from a state of
complete intoxication. He violently shut the entrance door and returned
to the courtyard. The rain had by this time ceased, but the wind still
continued strong and gusty, and drove rapidly along the heavy gray
clouds which veiled without entirely excluding the brightness of the
moon, whose pale and sickly light shone on the house.

Somewhat calmed by the clear freshness of the night air, Jacques
Ferrand, as though hoping to find relief from his internal agitation by
the rapidity of his movements, plunged into the muddy paths of his
garden, walking with quick, hurried steps, and from time to time
pressing his clenched hands against his forehead. Heedless of the
direction he proceeded in, he at length reached the termination of a
walk, adjoining to which was a dilapidated greenhouse.

Suddenly he stumbled heavily against a mass of newly disturbed earth.
Mechanically he stooped down to examine the nature of the impediment
which presented itself; the deep hole which had been dug, and morsels of
torn garments lying by, told him with awful certainty that he stood by
the grave dug by poor Louise Morel to receive the remains of her dead
infant,--her infant, which was also the child of the heartless, hardened
wretch who now stood trembling and conscience-stricken beside this
fearful memento of his sensuality and brutal persecution of a poor and
helpless girl. And spite of his hardihood, his long course of sin and
seared conscience, a deadly tremor shook his frame, he felt an
instinctive persuasion that the hour of deep retribution was at hand.

Under other circumstances Jacques Ferrand would have trampled the humble
grave beneath his feet without remorse or concern, but now, exhausted by
the preceding scene, he felt his usual boldness forsake him, while fear
and trembling came upon him. A cold sweat bedewed his brow, his
tottering knees refused to support him, and he fell motionless beside
the open grave.




CHAPTER V.

LA FORCE.


We may, perhaps, be accused, from the space accorded to the following
scenes, of injuring the unity of our story by some episodical pictures;
but it seems to us that, at this moment particularly, when important
questions of punishment are engaging the attention of the legislature,
that the interior of a prison--that frightful pandemonium, that gloomy
thermometer of civilisation--will be an opportune study. In a word, the
various physiognomies of prisoners of all classes, the relations of kin
or affection, which still bind them to the world from which their gaol
walls separate them, appear to us worthy of interest and attention. We
hope, therefore, to be excused for having grouped about many prisoners
known to the readers of this history other secondary characters,
intended to put in relief certain ideas of criticism, and to complete
the initiation of a prison life.

       *       *       *       *       *

Let us enter La Force. There is nothing sombre or repulsive in the
aspect of this house of incarceration in the Rue du Roi de Sicile, in
the Marais. In the centre of one of the first courts there are some
clumps of trees, thickened with shrubs, at the roots of which there are
already, here and there, the green, precocious shoots of primroses and
snowdrops. A raised ascent, surmounted by a porch covered with
trellis-work, in which knotty stalks of the vine entwine, leads to one
of the seven or eight walks assigned to the prisoners. The vast
buildings which surround these courts very much resemble those of
barrack or manufactory kept with exceeding care. There are lofty façades
of white stone, pierced with high and large windows, which admit of the
free circulation of pure air.

The stones and pavement of the enclosures are kept excessively clean. On
the ground floor, the large apartments, warmed during the winter, are
kept well ventilated during the summer, and are used during the day as
places of conversation, work, or for the meals of the prisoners. The
upper stories are used as immense dormitories, ten or twelve feet high,
with dry and shining floors; two rows of iron beds are there arranged,
and excellent bedding it is, consisting of a palliasse, a soft and thick
mattress, a bolster, white linen sheets, and a warm woollen blanket. At
the sight of these establishments, comprising all the requisites for
comfort and health, we are much surprised, in spite of ourselves, being
accustomed to suppose that prisons are miserable, dirty, unwholesome,
and dark. This is a mistake.

It is such dogholes as that occupied by Morel the lapidary, and in which
so many poor and honest workmen languish in exhaustion, compelled to
give up their truckle-bed to a sick wife, and to leave, with hopeless
despair, their wretched, famishing children, shuddering with cold in
their infected straw--that is miserable, dark, dirty, and pestilent! The
same contrast holds with respect to the physiognomy of the inhabitants
of these two abodes. Incessantly occupied with the wants of their
family, which they can scarcely supply from day to day, seeing a
destructive competition lessen their wages, the laborious artisans
become dejected, dispirited; the hour of rest does not sound for them,
and a kind of somnolent lassitude alone breaks in upon their overtasked
labour. Then, on awakening from this painful lethargy, they find
themselves face to face with the same overwhelming thoughts of the
present, and the same uneasiness for the future.

But the prisoner, indifferent to the past, happy with the life he leads,
certain of the future (for he can assure it by an offence or a crime),
regretting his liberty, doubtless, but finding much compensation in the
actual enjoyment, certain of taking with him when he quits prison a
considerable sum of money, gained by easy and moderate labour, esteemed,
or rather dreaded, by his companions, in proportion to his depravity and
perversity, the prisoner, on the contrary, will always be gay and
careless.

Again, we ask, what does he want? Does he not find in prison good
shelter, good bed, good food, high wages,[1] easy work, and, especially,
society at his choice,--a society, we repeat, which measures his
consideration by the magnitude of his crimes? A hardened convict knows
neither misery, hunger, nor cold. What is to him the horror he inspires
honest persons withal? He does not see, does not know them. His crimes
made his glory, his influence, his strength, with the ruffians in the
midst of whom he will henceforward pass his life. Why should he fear
shame? Instead of the serious and charitable remonstrances which might
compel him to blush for and repent the past, he hears the ferocious
applauses which encourage him to theft and murder. Scarcely imprisoned,
he plans fresh crimes. What can be more logical? If discovered, and at
once apprehended, he will find the repose, the bodily supplies of a
prison, and his joyous and daring associates of crime and debauchery. If
his experience in crimes be less than that of others, does he for that
evince the less remorse? It follows that he is exposed to brutal
scoffing, infernal taunts, and horrible threats. And--a thing so rare
that it has become the exception to the rule--if the prisoner leaves
this fearful pandemonium with the firm resolution to return to the paths
of honesty by excessive labour, courage, patience, and honesty, and has
been able to conceal the infamy of his past career, the meeting with one
of his old comrades in gaol is sufficient to overturn this good
intention for the restoration of his character, so painfully struggled
for.

  [1] High wages, if we reflect that, with all expenses paid, a
  prisoner may gain from five to ten sous a day. How many workmen
  are there who can save such a sum?

And in this way: A hardened, discharged convict proposes a job to a
repentant comrade; the latter, in spite of bitter menaces, refuses this
criminal association; forthwith an anonymous information reveals the
life of the unfortunate fellow who was desirous, at every sacrifice, of
concealing and expiating a first fault by honourable behaviour. Then,
exposed to the contempt, or, at least, the distrust, of those whose
good-will he had acquired by dint of industry and probity, this man,
reduced to distress, and urged by want, yielding at length to incessant
temptations, although nearly restored to society, will again fall, and
for ever, into the depths of that abyss whence he had escaped with such
difficulty.

In the following scenes we shall endeavour to demonstrate the monstrous
and inevitable consequences of confinement in masses. After ages of
barbarous experiments and pernicious hesitations, it seemed suddenly
understood how irrational it is to plunge into an atmosphere of deepest
vice persons whom a pure and salubrious air could alone save. How many
centuries to discover that, in placing in dense contact diseased beings,
we redouble the intensity of their malignity, which is thus rendered
incurable! How many centuries to discover that there is, in a word, but
one remedy for this overwhelming leprosy which threatens
society,--isolation!

We should esteem ourselves happy if our feeble voice could be, if not
relied upon, at least spread amongst all those which, more imposing,
more eloquent than our own, demand with such just and impatient urgency
the entire and unqualified application of the cell system.

One day, perchance, society will know that wickedness is an accidental,
not an organic malady; that crimes are almost always the results of
perverted instincts, impulses, still good in their essence, but
falsified, rendered evil, by ignorance, egotism, or the carelessness of
governments; and that the health of the soul, like that of the body, is
unquestionably kept subordinate to the laws of a healthy and preserving
system of control.

God bestows on all passions that strive for predominance, strong
appetites, the desire to be at ease, and it is for society to balance
and satisfy these wants. The man who only participates in strength,
good-will, and health has a right--a sovereign right--to have his labour
justly remunerated, in a way that shall assure to him not the
superfluities, but the necessaries of life,--the means of continuing
healthy and strong, active and industrious, and, consequently, honest
and good, because his condition is rendered happy. The gloomy regions of
misery and ignorance are peopled with morbid beings with withered
hearts. Purify these moral sewers, spread instruction, the inducement to
labour, fair wages, just rewards, and then these unhealthy faces, these
perishing frames, will be restored to virtue, which is the health, the
life of the soul.

       *       *       *       *       *

Let us now introduce the reader into the room in the prison of La Force
in which the prisoners are allowed to see persons who visit them. It is
a dark place, partitioned in its length into two equal parts, by a
narrow grated division. One of these divisions communicates with the
interior of the prison, and is the place for the prisoners. The other
communicates with the turnkey's lobby, and is devoted to the persons
admitted to visit the prisoners. These interviews and conversations take
place through the double iron grating of the reception room, in presence
of the turnkey, who remains in the interior, at the extremity of the
passage.

The appearance of the prisoners, who were in this room on the day in
question, offered great contrasts. Some were clad in wretched attire,
others seemed to belong to the working class, and some to the wealthy
citizen body. The same contrasts were remarkable amongst the visitors to
the prisoners, who were nearly all women. The prisoners generally appear
less downcast than the visitors, for, strange and sad to say, yet proved
by experience, there is but little sorrow or shame left after the
experience of three or four days spent in prison in society. Those who
most dreaded this hideous community habituate themselves to it quickly;
the contagion gains upon them. Surrounded by degraded beings, hearing
only the language of infamy, a kind of ferocious rivalry excites them;
and, either to emulate their companions in the struggle for brutalism,
or to make themselves giddy by the usual drunkenness, the newcomers
almost invariably display as much depravity and recklessness as the
_habitués_ of the prison.

Let us return to the reception-room. Notwithstanding the noisy hum of a
great many conversations carried on in undertones on each side of the
divisions, prisoners and visitors, after some experience, are able to
converse with each other without being for a moment disturbed by, or
attentive to, the conversation of their neighbours, which creates a kind
of secrecy in the midst of this noisy interchange of words, each being
compelled to hear the individual who addressed him, but not to hear a
word of what was said around him.

Amongst the prisoners called into the reception-room by visitors, the
one the farthest off from the turnkey was Nicholas Martial. To the
extreme depression with which he was seized on his apprehension, had
succeeded the most brazen assurance. Already the detestable and
contagious influence of a prison in common bore its fruits. No doubt,
had he been at once conveyed to a solitary cell, this wretch, still
under the influence of his first terror, and alone with the thought of
his crimes, fearful of impending punishment, might have experienced, if
not repentance, at least that wholesome dread from which nothing would
have distracted him.

And who knows what incessant, compulsory meditation may produce on a
guilty mind, reflecting on the crimes committed and the punishment that
is to follow? Far from this, thrown into the midst of a horde of
bandits, in whose eyes the least sign of repentance is cowardice,--or,
rather, treason,--which they make him dearly expiate; for, in their
savage obduracy, their senseless bravado, they consider every man as a
spy on them, who, sad and disconsolate, regretting his fault, does not
join in their audacious recklessness, and trembles at their contact.
Thrown into the midst of these miscreants, Nicholas Martial, who had for
a long time, by report, known the prison manners, overcame his weakness,
and wished to appear worthy of a name already celebrated in the annals
of robbery and murder.

Several old offenders had known his father, who had been executed, and
others his brother, who was at the galleys; he was received and
instantly patronised by these veterans in crime with savage interest.
This fraternal reception between murderer and murderer elevated the
widow's son; the praises bestowed on the hereditary infamy of his family
intoxicated him. Soon forgetting, in this horrible mood, the future that
threatened him, he only remembered his past crimes to glory in them, and
elevate himself still higher in the eyes of his companions. The
expression of Nicholas's physiognomy was then as insolent as that of his
visitor was disturbed and alarmed.

This visitor was Daddy Micou, the receiver and lodging-house keeper in
the Passage de la Brasserie, into whose abode Madame de Fermont and her
daughter, victims of Jacques Ferrand's cupidity, had been compelled to
retreat. Father Micou knew the penalties to which he was amenable for
having many a time and oft obtained at low prices the fruits of the
robberies of Nicholas and many others of his stamp. The widow's son
being apprehended, the receiver felt he was almost at the mercy of the
ruffian, who might impeach him as a regular buyer. Although this
accusation could not be supported by flagrant proofs, still it was not
the less dangerous, the less dreaded by Daddy Micou, and he had thus
instantly obeyed the orders which Nicholas had transmitted to him by a
discharged prisoner.

"Ah, ah! how goes it, Daddy Micou?" said the brigand.

"At your service, my good fellow," replied the receiver, eagerly. "As
soon as I saw the person you sent to me, I directly--"

"Oh, you are becoming ceremonious, daddy!" said Nicholas, with
impatience. "Why is this, because I'm in trouble?"

"No, no, my lad,--no, no!" replied the receiver, who was not anxious to
seem on terms of familiarity with this ruffian.

"Come, come, be as familiar as usual, or I shall think you have
forgotten our intimacy, and that would break my heart."

"Well, well," said Micou, with a groan, "I directly went about your
little commissions."

"That's all right, daddy. I knew well enough that you would not forget
your friends. And my tobacco?"

"I have left two pounds at the lodge, my boy."

"Is it good?"

"Cannot be better."

"And the knuckle of ham?"

"Left at the lodge, also, with a four-pound white loaf; and I have added
something that will surprise you, in the shape of a dozen hard eggs and
a Dutch cheese."

"This is what I call doing the thing like a friend! And the wine?"

"Six bottles of capital. But, you know, you will only have one bottle a
day."

"Well, that can't be helped, and so one must make up one's mind to it."

"I hope you are satisfied with me, my boy?"

"Certain, and I shall be so again, and for ever, Father Micou; for the
ham, the cheese, the eggs, and the wine will only last just so long as
it takes to swallow them; but, as a friend of mine remarked, when they
are gone there'll be more where they came from, thanks to you, who will
always do the handsome thing so long as I do the same."

"What! You expect--"

"That in two or three days you will renew my little stock, daddy dear."

"Devil burn me if I do! It's all very good for once--"

"For once! What d'ye mean, man? Why, ham and wine are always good, you
know that very well."

"Certainly, but I have not undertaken to feed you in delicacies."

"Oh, Daddy Micou, that's shabby--indecent. What, refuse me ham! One who
has so often brought you 'double tresse' (stolen lead)!"

"Hush, hush! You mischievous fellow," cried the alarmed receiver.

"No, I'll put the question to the big-wig (the judge). I'll say to him,
only imagine now, sir, that Daddy Micou--"

"Hush, hush!" exclaimed the receiver, seeing with equal alarm and anger
that Nicholas was much disposed to abuse the influence which their
guilty companionship gave him. "I'll agree--I will renew your provision
when it is consumed."

"That's all right, and what's fair. And you mustn't forget, too, to send
some coffee to mother and Calabash, who are at St. Lazare; they like a
cup in a morning, and they'll miss it."

"What more? Would you ruin me, you extortionate fellow?"

"Oh, just as you like, Daddy Micou,--don't say another word, but I shall
ask the big-wig--"

"Well, then, they shall have the coffee," said the receiver,
interrupting him. "But devil take you! Accursed be the day when I first
knew you!"

"Old boy, I say quite the contrary. I am delighted to have your valuable
acquaintance at this particular moment. I revere you as a nursing
father."

"I hope you have nothing more to ask of me?" said Micou, with
bitterness.

"Yes; say to my mother and sister that, if I was frightened when they
apprehended me, I am no longer so, but as determined as they two are."

"I'll say so. Anything more?"

"Stay another moment or two. I forgot to ask you for a couple of pairs
of warm woollen stockings,--you'd be sorry if I caught cold, shouldn't
you?"

"I should be glad if you were dead."

"Thank ye, daddy, thank ye! But that pleasure is yet to come, and to-day
I'm alive and kicking, and inclined to take things easy. If they serve
me as they did my father, at least I shall have enjoyed my life while it
lasted."

"It's a nice life, yours is!"

"Superb! Since I have been here I've enjoyed myself like a king. If we
had lamps and fireworks, they would have lighted them up, and fired them
off in my honour, when they knew I was the son of the famous Martial who
was guillotined."

"How affecting! What a glorious parentage!"

"Why, d'ye see, there are many dukes and marquises. Why, then, shouldn't
we have our nobility, too?--such as us!" said the ruffian, with bitter
irony.

"To be sure, and Charlot (the headsman) will give you your letters of
nobility on the Place du Palais."

"You may be sure it won't be the gaol chaplain. But in prison we should
have the nobility of top-sawyers (noted robbers) to be thought much of;
if not, you are looked upon as nobody at all. You should only see how
they behave to those who are not tip-tops and give themselves airs. Now
there's in here a chap called Germain, a young fellow, who appears
disgusted with us, and seems to despise us all. Let him take care of his
hide! He's a sulky hound, and they say he is a 'nose' (a spy); if he is,
they'll screw his nose around, just by way of warning."

"Germain? A young man called Germain?"

"Yes; d'ye know him? Is he one of us? If so, in spite of his looks,
we--"

"I don't know him; but if he is the Germain I have heard speak of, his
affair is settled."

"How?"

"Why, he has only just escaped from a plot which Velu and the
Stout-Cripple laid for him lately."

"Why?"

"I don't know, but they said that in the country somewhere he had
tricked one of their pals."

"I was sure of it, Germain is a spy. Well, we'll spy him! I'll go and
tell our friends; that'll set them sharper against him. By the way, how
does Gros-Boiteux get on with your lodgers?"

"Thank heaven, I have got rid of him,--a blackguard! You'll see him here
to-day or to-morrow."

"All right; how we shall laugh! He's a boy who is never taken aback!"

"It's because I knew that he would find this Germain here that I said
his affair was settled,--if it's the same chap."

"Why have they got hold of the Gros-Boiteux?"

"For a robbery committed with a discharged convict, who wanted to turn
honest and work. Well, you see, the Gros-Boiteux soon got him in a
string; he is such a vicious devil, the Boiteux! I am certain it was he
who broke open the trunk of the two women who live in the little room
on my fourth floor."

"What women?--ah, yes, two women! You was smitten by the young 'un, I
remember, you old vagabond, because you thought her so nice."

"They'll not smite anybody any more, for by this time the mother must be
dead, and the daughter is scarcely alive. I shall lose a fortnight's
rent, and I sha'n't give a sou to pay for their burial. I've had so many
losses, without talking of the little matters you entreat me to give you
and your family, that my affairs are quite disarranged. I've had the
luck of it this year."

"Pooh, pooh! You are always complaining, old gentleman; you who are as
rich as Croesus. But don't let me detain you."

"You're polite."

"You'll call and tell me how mother and Calabash are when you bring me
my other provisions?"

"Yes, if I must."

"Ah, I'd nearly forgot; whilst you're about it, bring me a new cap, of
plaid velvet, with an acorn at top; mine's regularly done for."

"Come, now, you're laughing at me."

"No, daddy, by no means; I want a plaid velvet cap. That's my wish."

"Then you're resolved to make a beggar of me?"

"Come, I say, Micou, don't get out of temper about it. It's only yes or
no,--I do not force you, but--you understand?"

The receiver, reflecting that he was at the mercy of Nicholas, rose,
fearing that if he prolonged his visit he would be exposed to fresh
demands.

"You shall have your cap," he replied; "but mind, if you ask me for
anything more, I will give you nothing,--let what will occur, you'll
suffer as much as I shall."

"Make your mind easy, I'll not make you sing (force you to give money
under the threat of certain disclosures) more than is sufficient for you
not to lose your voice; for that would be a pity, you sing so well."

The receiver went away, shrugging his shoulders with rage, and the
turnkey conducted Nicholas back to the interior of the prison.

At the moment when Micou quitted the reception-room, Rigolette entered
it. The turnkey, a man about forty years of age, an old soldier, with
stern and marked features, was dressed in a round jacket, with a blue
cap and trousers; two silver stars were embroidered on the collar and
facings of his jacket. At the sight of the grisette the face of this man
brightened up, and assumed an expression of benevolence. He had always
been struck by the grace, gentleness, and touching kindness with which
Rigolette consoled Germain when she came there to see him. Germain was,
besides, not an ordinary prisoner; his reserve, his peaceable demeanour,
and his melancholy inspired the persons about the prison with deep
interest,--an interest which they did not manifest, for fear of exposing
him to the ill-treatment of his brutal companions, who, as we have said,
looked upon him with mistrusting hate. It was raining in torrents, but,
thanks to her goloshes and umbrella, Rigolette had boldly faced the wind
and rain.

"What a shocking day, my poor girl!" said the turnkey, kindly. "It
requires a good deal of courage to leave home such weather as this."

"When we think as we come along of the pleasure we shall give a poor
prisoner, we don't think much about the weather, sir."

"I need not ask you whom you have come to see?"

"Certainly not. And how is poor Germain?"

"Why, my dear, I have seen many prisoners; they have been sad for a
day,--two days, perhaps,--and then gradually got into the same way as
the others; and those who were most out of sorts at first often ended
by becoming the merriest of all. But M. Germain, is not one of these, he
has still that melancholy air."

"How sorry I am to hear it!"

"When I'm on duty in the yards, I look at him from the corner of my eye,
he is always alone. I have already told you that you should advise him
not to do so, but to resolve on conversing with the others, or it will
end with his becoming suspected and ill-used by them. We keep a close
look-out, but a mischievous blow is soon given."

"Oh, sir, is there any danger threatens him?" cried Rigolette.

"Not precisely, but these ruffians see that he is not one of them, and
hate him because he has an honest and proud look."

"Yet I advised him to do what you told me, sir, and make up his mind to
talk to some of the least wicked! But he cannot help it, he cannot get
over his repugnance."

"He is wrong--wrong! A struggle is so soon begun."

"Can't he, then, be separated from the others?"

"For the last two or three days, since I have seen their ill-will
towards him, I advised him to place himself what we call _à la
pistole_,--that is, in a room."

"Well?"

"I had not thought of one thing. A whole row of cells is undergoing
repair, and the others are full."

"But these wretches may kill him!" said Rigolette, her eyes filling with
tears. "And if, by chance, he had any protectors, what could they do for
him, sir?"

"Nothing, but enable him to obtain what these debtors who can pay for it
obtain,--a chamber, _à la pistole_."

"Alas, then, he is lost, if they hate him in prison."

"Oh, don't be downhearted, we will look well to him. But I repeat, my
dear, do advise him to familiarise himself a little,--the first step is
half the battle."

"I will advise him as strongly as I can, sir. But for a good and honest
heart it is very hard, you know, to familiarise itself with such
people."

"Of two evils we must choose the least. Now I will fetch M. Germain. But
now I think of it," said the turnkey, "there are only two visitors; wait
until they are gone, there'll not be any more to-day, for it is two
o'clock. I will then fetch M. Germain, and you can talk at your ease. I
can then, when you are alone, let him come into the passage, so that you
will be separated by one grating instead of two. Won't that be better?"

"Ah, sir, how kind you are, and how much I thank you!"

"Hush! Do not let any one hear you, or they may be jealous. Sit down
there at the end of the bench, and when this man and woman have gone, I
will tell M. Germain."

The turnkey returned to his post inside the grating, and Rigolette sat
down very melancholy at the end of the visitors' bench.

Whilst the grisette is awaiting the coming of Germain, we will allow the
reader to overhear the conversation of the prisoners who remained there
after the departure of Nicholas Martial.




CHAPTER VI.

PIQUE-VINAIGRE.


The prisoner who was beside Barbillon was a man about forty-five years
of age, thin, mean-looking, with a keen, intelligent, jovial, merry
face. He had an enormous mouth, almost entirely toothless; and, when he
spoke, he worked it from side to side, very much after the style of
those orators who are accustomed to harangue from booths at fairs. His
nose was flat, his head disproportionately large and nearly bald; he
wore an old gray knit worsted waistcoat, a pair of trousers of
indescribable colour, torn and patched in a thousand places; his feet,
half wrapped up in pieces of old linen, were thrust into wooden shoes.

This man, Fortuné Gobert, called Pique-Vinaigre, formerly a juggler, a
convict freed after condemnation for the crime of uttering false money,
was charged with having broken from gaol and committed violent burglary.
Having been confined but very few days in La Force, Pique-Vinaigre
already filled the office of story-teller, to the general satisfaction
of his fellow prisoners. Now story-tellers have become very rare, but
formerly each ward had usually, for a slight general subscription, its
official story-teller, who, by his narrations, made the long winter
evenings appear less tedious when the prisoners went to bed at sunset.

If it be curious to note the desire for these fictions which these
outcasts display, it is yet a more singular thing to reflect upon the
hearing of these recitals. Men corrupted to the very marrow, thieves,
and murderers, prefer especially the histories in which are expressed
generous, heroic sentiments, recitals in which weakness and goodness are
avenged in fierce retribution. It is the same thing with women of lost
reputation; they are singularly fond of simple, touching, and
sentimental details, and almost invariably refuse to read obscene books.

Pique-Vinaigre excelled in that kind of heroic tales in which weakness,
after a thousand trials, concludes by triumphing over persecution. He
possessed, besides, a deep fund of satire, which had procured for him
his name, his repartees being very frequently ironical or merry. He had
just entered the reception-room. Opposite to him, on the other side of
the grating, was a female of about thirty-five years of age, of pale,
mild, and interesting countenance, meanly but cleanly clad. She was
weeping bitterly, and held a handkerchief to her eyes. Pique-Vinaigre
looked at her with a mixture of impatience and affection.

"Come, Jeanne," he said, "do not play the child. It is sixteen years
since we met, and to keep your handkerchief up to your eyes is not the
way for us to know each other again."

"Brother--my poor, dear Fortuné! I am choking--I cannot speak."

"Ah, nonsense! What ails you?"

His sister repressed her sobs, wiped her eyes, and, looking at him with
astonishment, replied, "What ails me? What, when I find you again in
prison, where you have already been fifteen years!"

"True. It is six months to-day since I left Melun; and I didn't call
upon you in Paris because the capital was forbidden to me."

"Why did you leave Beaugency when you were under surveillance?"

"In the first place, Jeanne, since the gratings are between us, you
must fancy I have embraced you, squeezed you in my arms, as a man ought
to do who has not seen his sister for an eternity. Now let us talk. A
prisoner at Melun, who is called the Gros-Boiteux, told me that there
was at Beaugency an old convict of his acquaintance, who employed the
freed prisoners in a factory of white lead. Those who work at it in a
month or two catch the lead-colic. One in three of those attacked die.
It is true that others die also; but they take their time about it and
get on, sometimes as long as a year or even eighteen months. Then the
trade is better paid than most others, and there are fellows who hold
out at it for two or three years. But they are elders--patriarchs--of
the white-leaders. They die, it is true, but that is all."

"And why did you choose a trade so dangerous that they die at it?"

"What could I do? When I went to Melun for that well-known job of the
forged coin I was a thimble-rigger. As in gaol there was no scope for my
line of business, and I am not stronger than a good stout flea, they put
me to making children's toys. There was a tradesman in Paris who found
it very advantageous to have his wooden trumpets and swords made by the
prisoners. Why, I must have made half the wooden swords used by the
children of Paris; and I was great in the trumpet line. Rattles,
too,--why, with two of my manufacture I could have set on edge the teeth
of a whole battalion! Well, when my time was up I was a first-rate maker
of penny trumpets, and my only resource was making child's playthings.
Now, supposing that a whole town, young and old, were inclined to play
tur-tu-tu-tu on my trumpets, I should still have had a good deal of
trouble to earn a livelihood; and then I could not have induced a whole
population to continue playing the trumpet from morning to night."

"You are still such a jester!"

"Better joke than cry. Well, then, seeing that at forty leagues from
Paris my trade of juggler was no more useful to me than my trumpets, I
requested the surveillance at Beaugency, intending to become a
white-leader. It is a trade that gives you indigestion enough to send
you mad; but until one bursts one lives, and that is always something,
and it was better than turning thief. I am neither brave nor strong
enough to thieve, and it was from pure accident that I did the thing I
have just mentioned to you."

"And yet you had the courage to take up with a deadly trade! Come now,
Fortuné, you wish to make yourself out worse than you are."

"I thought that the malady would have so little to take hold of in me
that it would go elsewhere, and that I should become one of the
patriarchal white-leaders. Well, when I came out of prison, I found my
earnings had considerably increased by telling stories."

"So you told us. You remember how it amused poor old mother?"

"Dear soul! She never suspected that I was at Melun?"

"Never. She thought you had gone abroad."

"Why, my girl, my follies were my father's fault, who dressed me up as a
clown to help in his mountebank displays, to swallow tow and spit fire,
which did not allow me spare time to form acquaintance with the sons of
the peers of France; and so I fell into bad company. But to return to
Beaugency. When once I had left Melun, like the rest, I thought I must
see some fun; if not, what was the use of my money? Well, I reached
Beaugency, with scarcely a sou in my pocket. I asked for Velu, the
friend of Gros-Boiteux, the head of the manufactory. Your servant! There
was no longer any white-lead factory; it had killed eleven persons in
the year, and the old convict had shut up shop. So here I was in the
middle of this city, with my talent for trumpet-making as my only means
of existence, and my discharge from prison as my only certificate of
recommendation. I did my best to procure work, but in vain. One called
me a thief, another a beggar, a third said I had escaped from gaol; all
turned their backs upon me. So I had nothing to do but die of hunger in
a city which I was not to leave for five years. Seeing this, I broke my
ban, and came to Paris to utilise my talents. As I had not the means to
travel in a coach and four, I came begging and tramping all the way,
avoiding the _gens-d'armes_ as I would a mad dog. I had luck, and
reached Auteuil without accident. I was very tired, hungry as a wolf,
and dressed, as you may see, not in the height of the fashion." And
Pique-Vinaigre glanced comically at his rags. "I had not a sou, and was
liable to be taken up as a vagabond. Well, _ma foi!_ an occasion
presented itself; the devil tempted me, and, in spite of my cowardice--"

"Enough, brother,--enough!" said his sister, fearing lest the turnkey
might hear his dangerous confession.

"Are you afraid they listen?" he said. "Be tranquil; I have nothing to
conceal. I was taken in the act."

"Alas!" said Jeanne, weeping bitterly; "how calmly you say this!"

"If I spoke warmly what should I gain by it? Come, listen to reason,
Jeanne. Must I have to console you?"

Jeanne wiped her eyes and sighed.

"Well, to go back to my affair," continued Pique-Vinaigre. "I had nearly
reached Auteuil, in the dusk. I could not go any farther, and I did not
wish to enter Paris but at night; so I sat down behind a hedge to rest
myself, and reflect on my plan of campaign. My reflections sent me to
sleep, and when the sound of voices awoke me it was night. I listened.
It was a man and woman, who were talking as they went along on the other
side of the hedge. The man said to the woman, 'Who do you think would
come and rob us? Haven't we left the house alone a hundred times?'
'Yes,' replied the woman; 'but then we hadn't a hundred francs in the
drawers.' 'Who knows that, you fool?' says the husband. 'You are right,'
replies the wife; and on they went. _Ma foi!_ the occasion seemed to me
too favourable to lose, and there was no danger. I waited until they got
a little farther on, and then came from behind the hedge, and, looking
twenty paces behind me, I saw a small cottage, which I was sure must be
the house with the hundred francs, as it was the only habitation in
sight. Auteuil was about five hundred yards off. I said to
myself,'Courage, old boy,--there is no one. Then it is night; if there
is no watch-dog (you know I was always afraid of dogs), why, the job is
as good as done.' Luckily there was no dog. To make sure I knocked at
the door. Nothing. This encouraged me. The shutters were closed on the
ground floor, but I put my stick between and forced them. I got into the
window, and in the room the fire was still alight. So I saw the drawers,
but no key. With the tongs I forced the lock, and under a heap of linen
I found the prize, wrapped in an old woollen stocking. I did not think
of taking anything else, but jumping out of the window, I alighted on
the back of the garde-champêtre, who was returning home."

"What a misfortune!"

"The moon had risen. He saw me jump from the window and seized me. He
was a fellow who could have eaten a dozen such as I was. Too great a
coward to resist, I surrendered quietly. I had the stocking still in my
hand, and he heard the money chink, took it, put it in his game bag, and
made me accompany him to Auteuil. We reached the mayor's with a crowd of
blackguards and _gens-d'armes_. The owners of the cottage were fetched,
and they made their depositions. There was no means of denial; so I
confessed everything and signed the depositions, and they put on me
handcuffs, and I was brought here."

"In prison again, and for a long time, perhaps?"

"Listen to me, Jeanne, for I will not deceive you. I may as well tell
you at once; for it is no longer an affair of prison."

"Why not?"

"Why, the relapse, the breaking in and entry into a dwelling-house at
night, the lawyer told me, is a complete affair, and I shall have
fifteen or twenty years at the galleys, and the public exposure into the
bargain."

"The galleys,--and you so weak? Why, you'll die!"

"And suppose I had been with the white-lead party?"

"But the galleys,--the galleys!"

"It is a prison in the open air, with a red shirt instead of a brown
one; and then I have always had a curiosity to see the sea!"

"But the public exposure! To be subject to the contempt of all the
world! Oh, my poor brother!" And the poor woman wept bitterly.

"Come, come, Jeanne, be composed; it is an uncomfortable quarter of an
hour to pass. But you know I am used to see crowds. When I played with
my cups and balls, I always had a crowd around me; so I'll fancy I am
thimble-rigging, and if it has too much effect on me I'll close my eyes,
and that will seem as if no one was looking at me."

Speaking with this derision, the unhappy man affected this
insensibility, in order to console his sister. For a man accustomed to
the manners of prisons, and in whom all shame is utterly dead, the
_bagne_ (galleys) is, in fact, only a change of shirt, as Pique-Vinaigre
said, with frightful truth. Many prisoners in the central prisons even
prefer the _bagne_, because of the riotous life they lead, often
committing attempts at murder in order to be sent to Brest or Toulon.

"Twenty years at the galleys!" repeated Pique-Vinaigre's poor sister.

"Take comfort, Jeanne, they will only pay me as I deserve. I am too weak
to be put to hard labour, and if there is no manufactory of wooden
trumpets and swords as at Melun, why, I shall be set to some easy work;
they will employ me at the infirmary. I am not a troublesome fellow, but
a good, easy chap; and I shall tell my stories as I do here, and shall
be esteemed by my chiefs, and adored by my comrades, and I will send you
carved cocoanuts and straw boxes for my nephews and nieces."

"If you had only written to me that you were coming to Paris, I would
have tried to conceal you until you found work."

"_Pardieu!_ I meant to have gone to you, but I preferred arriving with
my hands full,--for I see you do not ride in your carriage. Well, and
your children,--and your husband?"

"Has left me these three years, after having sold off every stick, not
leaving me or the children one single thing but a straw palliasse."

"Poor Jeanne! How have you managed alone with three children?"

"Why, I have suffered very much. I worked at my business as a
trimming-maker as well as I could, the neighbours helping me a little,
watching my children when I went out. And then I, who haven't much luck,
had a bit of good fortune once in my life; but it was no avail, because
of my husband."

"How was that?"

"My employer had spoken of my trouble to one of his customers, telling
him how my husband had left me with nothing, after having sold all our
furniture, and that, in spite of this, I was working as hard as I could
to bring up my children. One day when I returned what did I find? Why,
my room fitted up again, a good bed, furniture, and linen; it was the
kind customer of my employer."

"Poor sister! Why didn't you write and tell me of your misfortune; and
then, instead of spending my money, I would have sent you some."

"What! I free to ask of you a prisoner?"

"Why not? I was fed, clothed, lodged, at the cost of government; all I
gained was so much profit. But knowing my brother-in-law was a good
workman, and you a good manager and worker, I was quite easy, and melted
my 'tin' with my eyes shut, and my mouth open."

"My husband was a good workman, that is true; but he became dissipated.
However, thanks to this unexpected aid, I took courage again. My eldest
girl began to earn a little, and we were happy, except when we
remembered that you were at Melun. Work went well with us, and my
children were well clad, and wanted for nothing hardly, and that gave me
good heart; and I had actually saved thirty-three francs, when suddenly
my husband returned. I had not seen him for a year; and when he found me
so well off and tidily dressed, he stood for nothing, but took my money
and lived with us without working, getting drunk every day, and beating
me when I complained. And that is not all. He gave up a small room
adjoining ours to a woman with whom he lived openly as his mistress; so
I had that indignity to endure for the second time. He soon began to
make away with the few poor things I had managed to get together; so,
foreseeing what would be the end of such conduct, I went to a lawyer who
lived in the same house, and begged him to advise me how to act to
prevent my husband from taking the very bed from me and my children."

"Why, there needed no lawyer, I should think, to tell you that the only
thing you had to do was to turn your husband out of your doors."

"Ah, but I could not,--the law gave me no power to do so. The lawyer
told me that, as 'head of the family,' my husband could take up his
abode wherever I dwelt, and was not compelled to labour unless he liked;
that it was very hard for me to have to maintain him, and endure his
ill-treatment into the bargain, but that he recommended me to submit to
it, though certainly the circumstance of his having a mistress living
under the same roof entitled me to demand separation from 'bed and
board,' as he called it; and further, that as I would bring witnesses to
prove his having repeatedly struck me, and otherwise ill-treated me, I
could institute a suit against him, but that it would cost me, at the
very least, from four to five hundred francs to obtain a perfect
separation from him. Only think what a sum,--as much as I should earn in
a year! And who would lend me so much money, which would have to be
repaid heaven knows how? For four or five hundred francs is a perfect
fortune."

"Yet there is one very simple means of amassing the money," replied
Pique-Vinaigre, bitterly; "that of living upon air during the twelve
months it would take you to earn that sum, working all the same, but
denying yourself even the necessaries of life; and I am only surprised
the lawyer did not advise you to starve yourself and your children, or
any other kind-hearted expediency."

"You always make a jest of everything, brother!"

"This time, however, I am not in a jesting humour. It is scandalous that
the law should be so expensive to poor creatures such as we. Now, just
look at yourself,--a good and affectionate mother, striving by every
means in your power to bring up your children honestly and creditably;
your husband, a bad, lazy fellow, who, not content with stripping you of
all you earn, that he may spend his time in drinking and all sorts of
loose pleasures, beats and ill-uses you into the bargain. Well, you
apply to the justice of your country for protection for yourself and
your children. 'Ah,' say the lawyers, 'yours is a hard case, and your
husband is a worthless vagabond, and you shall have justice. But then
you must pay five hundred francs for that same justice,--five hundred
francs, mind; precisely all your utmost labour can obtain to nourish
yourself and family for a year. I tell you what, Jeanne, all this proves
the truth of the old saying, that 'There are but two sorts of
people,--those who are hanged, and those who deserve to be!'"

Rigolette, alone and pensively inclined, had not lost a word of all that
tale of woe breathed by the poor, suffering, and patient wife into her
brother's ear; while her naturally kind heart deeply sympathised with
all she heard, and she fully resolved upon relating the whole history to
Rodolph the very first time she saw him, feeling quite sure of his ready
and benevolent aid in succouring them. Deeply interested in the mournful
fate of the sister of Pique-Vinaigre, she could not take her eyes from
the poor woman's face, and was endeavouring to draw a little closer to
her; but unluckily, just at that moment, a fresh visitant, entering the
room, inquired for a prisoner, and while the person he wished to see was
sent for, he very coolly seated himself on the bench between Jeanne and
the grisette, who, at the sight of the individual who so unceremoniously
interrupted her making closer acquaintance with her neighbour, felt a
degree of surprise almost amounting to fear, for in him she recognised
one of the bailiffs sent by Jacques Ferrand to arrest poor Morel, the
lapidary. This circumstance, recalling as it did to the mind of
Rigolette the implacable enemy of Germain, redoubled her sadness, which
had been in some manner diverted while listening to the touching recital
of the unfortunate sister of Pique-Vinaigre.

Retreating from the fresh arrival as far as she could, the grisette
leaned her back against the wall, and once more relapsed into her
mournful ruminations.

"Look here, Jeanne!" cried Pique-Vinaigre, whose mirthful,
pleasure-loving countenance was suddenly overcast by a deep gloom; "I am
by nature neither very strong nor very courageous; but, certainly, if I
had chanced to have been by when your husband so shamefully treated you,
I don't think I should have let him slip through my fingers without
leaving my mark. But you were too good for him, and you put up with more
than you ought!"

"Why, what would you have had me do? I was obliged to endure what I
could not avoid. So long as there remained an article that would fetch
money did my husband sell it, even to the frock of my little girl, and
then repair to the alehouse with his mistress."

"But why did you give him your daily earnings?--you should have hid them
from him."

"So I did; but he beat me so dreadfully that I was obliged to give them
to him. I cared less for the blows he gave me than because I dreaded his
doing me some bodily injury, such as breaking my arm and dislocating my
wrist, that would have hindered me from working; and then, what would
have become of my poor children? Suppose I had been compelled to go to a
hospital, they must have perished with hunger. So, you see, brother, I
thought it was better to give up my earnings to my husband than run the
risk of being lamed by him."

"Poor woman! People talk of martyrs, but what martyrdom can exceed what
you have endured?"

"And yet I can truly say I never injured a living creature, and my only
desire was to work hard and do my duty to my husband and children. But
it is no use thinking about it; there are fortunate and unfortunate
persons, just the same as there are good people and bad people in the
world!"

"True; and it is a beautiful sight to see how happy and prosperous the
good always are,--aren't they, sister? And do you now believe yourself
for ever freed from your scoundrel of a husband?"

"I trust so. He staid till he had sold even my bedstead and the cradle
in which my youngest child lay. But when I think that, even more than
that, he wished--"

"What did he wish?"

"When I say he, I ought rather to tell you that it was rather that
wicked woman who urged him on. One day he said to me, 'I tell you what,
when folks have a pretty girl of fifteen belonging to them, they are
cursed fools if they do not turn her to good account.'"

"Oh, to be sure! When he had sold the poor girl's clothes, he was
willing to sell her also."

"When I heard him say those dreadful words I lost all command over
myself, and, I promise you, I did not spare him all the reproaches he
merited. And when his vile paramour took upon herself to interfere, and
say that my husband had a right to do what he liked with his own child,
I could contain myself no longer; but I fell with all my fury on the
wretched creature. This obtained for me a severe beating from my
husband, who then left me; and I have never seen him since."

"I tell you, Jeanne, that there are men condemned to ten years'
punishment and imprisonment who have not done so much to deserve it as
your husband has done."

"Still he had not a bad heart. It was his frequenting alehouses, and the
bad companions he met there who made him the lost creature he is."

"True, he would not hurt a child; but a grown-up person he was not so
very particular."

[Illustration: "_Then Left Me_"
Original Etching by Adrian Marcel]

"Alas, it is no use repining! We must take life as we find it. Well,
when my husband had left me I seemed to regain my courage, for I had no
longer the constant dread of being crippled by him, and so prevented
from earning bread for my children. For want of money to buy a mattress
(for one must live and pay one's rent before thinking of other things),
and poor Catherine (my eldest girl) working with me fifteen hours a day,
we could scarcely earn twenty pence a day both together, and my other
two children were too young to be able to earn anything; so, as I was
saying, for want of a mattress we slept upon straw we picked up from
time to time before the door of a large furniture packer in the
neighbourhood."

"And to think that I have spent and squandered all my money as I have
done!"

"Pray do not reproach yourself. How could you possibly imagine I was in
want or difficulties when I never said a word to lead you to conclude
so? So poor dear Catherine and I set to work again with redoubled
courage and determination. If you only knew what a dear, good child she
is, so honest, industrious, and good, watching me with her eyes to try
and find out what I wish her to do. Never has a murmur escaped her lips;
and yet she has seen much want and misery, though scarcely fifteen years
of age! She has consoled me in the midst of my severest troubles. Oh,
brother," added Jeanne, drying her eyes, "such a child is enough to
repay one for the severest trials!"

"You were just such another yourself at her age; and it is but fair you
should have some consolation amidst your troubles!"

"Believe me, 'tis rather on her account than mine I grieve; for it
really seems out of nature to see a young creature like her slaving
herself to death. For months together she has never quitted her work,
except once a week, when she goes to wash the trifle of linen we possess
in the river, near the Pont-au-Charge, where they only charge three sous
an hour for the use of the boats, beaters, etc. All the rest of her time
she is working like a galley-slave. Ah, she has known misfortune too
early! I know well that troubles must come; but then a poor girl should
be able to look back upon a happy childhood, at least! And another
thing that grieves and vexes me almost as much as that, is not being
able to render you any assistance. Still I will endeavour."

"Nonsense; don't talk so! Do you suppose I would accept of anything from
you? On the contrary, I'll tell you what I'll do to help you. From this
time forward I'll insist upon being paid for my amusing tales and
wonderful recitals; and those who object to pay from one to two sous for
hearing shall no more be treated to the entertaining histories of
Pique-Vinaigre. I shall soon collect a pretty little sum for you, I
know. But why don't you take furnished lodgings, so that your husband
could not molest you by selling your little possessions?"

"Furnished lodgings! Only consider, there are four, and for such a
number we should have to pay at least twenty sous (ten pence) a day.
What should we have to live upon if we paid all that for rent? And now
we give but fifty francs a year for the rooms we occupy."

"True, my girl," replied Pique-Vinaigre, with bitter irony. "That's
right,--work, slave, begrudge yourself necessary rest or food, in order
to refurnish your place. And directly you have once more got things
comfortably about you, your husband will come and strip you of
everything; and when he has deprived you almost of the garments you
wear, he will take your dear Catherine from you and sell her also."

"No, no, brother; he should take my life ere I would suffer him to
injure my good, my virtuous child."

"Oh, but he does not wish to do her any bodily harm; he only wants to
sell her. And then, remember, as the lawyer said, he is master until you
can find five hundred francs to be legally separated from him. So, as
that is not the case, at present you must make up your mind to submit to
what cannot be helped. It seems that, by law, your husband has a right
to take his child from you and send her where he pleases. And if he and
his mistress are bent upon the ruin of the poor girl, doubtless they
will stop at nothing to achieve it."

"Merciful God!" exclaimed the almost frantic mother, "surely such
wickedness can never be tolerated in a Christian land! Justice itself
would interpose if a father could insist upon selling his daughter's
honour."

"Justice!" repeated Pique-Vinaigre, with a sardonic laugh, "justice! No,
no, that meat is too dear for poor folks like you and I. Only, do you
see, if it refers to sending a parcel of poor wretches to prison or the
galleys, then it is quite a different affair; and they have justice
without its costing them anything,--nay, it becomes a matter of life and
death. An unhappy criminal gets his head shaved off by the guillotine
for nothing; not a single farthing are they or their friends, whether
rich or poor, tailed upon to pay for this act of impartial justice. The
object of it only gives his head! All other expenses are defrayed by a
liberal and justice-loving legislature. But the justice that would
protect a worthy and ill-treated mother of a family from being beaten
and pillaged to support the vices of a man who seeks even to sell the
honour of his innocent child,--such justice as that costs five hundred
francs! So, my dear Jeanne, you must do without it."

"Brother, brother," exclaimed the poor woman, bursting into tears, "you
break my heart by such words as these!"

"Well, and my own heart aches even to bursting as I think of your fate
and that of your children, while I recollect that I am powerless to help
you. I seem always gay and merry; but don't you be deceived by
appearances, Jeanne! I tell you what, I have two descriptions of gaiety,
my gay gaiety, and my sad gaiety. I have neither the strength or the
courage to indulge in envy, hatred, or malice, like the other prisoners;
I never go beyond words, more or less droll as occasion requires. My
cowardice and bodily weakness would never have allowed me to be worse
than I am. And nothing but the opportunity presenting itself of robbing
that poor little lone house, where there was neither a cat nor a dog to
frighten one, would have drawn me into the scheme that brought me here.
And then, again, by chance it was a brilliant moonlight night; for if
ever there was a poor devil afraid of being alone in the dark it is me."

"Ah, dear brother, I have always told you you are better than you
yourself think! Well, I trust the judges will be of my opinion and deal
mercifully with you."

"Mercy! What, for me, a liberated convict? Don't reckon too much on that
or you'll be disappointed. But, hang it, what care I? Here or elsewhere
is all the same to me! Let my judges do as they will with me, I shall
bear them no ill-will. For you are right; I am not a bad sort of fellow
at heart; and those who are worse than myself I hate with all the hatred
of a good man, and show my dislike by raillery of every sort. You can
imagine, can you not, that, by dint of relating stories in which, to
please my auditors, I always make those who wantonly torment others
receive the reward of their wickedness in the end, I get into the habit
of feeling all the indignation and virtuous desire for vengeance I
relate?"

"I should never have thought such persons as your prison companions
would have been interested in such recitals!"

"Oh, but I'm awake to how to tickle their fancies. If I were to relate
to them the story of a man who committed no end of crimes, robbery and
murder being among the mildest, and got scragged at last, they would get
into a downright passion and not allow me to go on; but if I make up a
tale of a woman or child, or a poor, cowardly fellow like myself, that a
breath of wind would knock over, being pursued by an atrocious
persecutor,--a sort of Blackbeard, who torments them to death, for the
pure pleasure of the thing! Oh, how they roar and stamp for joy when I
make Mr. Blackbeard in the end served out as he deserves. I have got a
story they have never yet heard, called 'Gringalet and Cut-in-Half,'
which used to delight all the folks at Melun. I have promised to tell it
to them here to-night. But, before I begin, I shall see that they come
down pretty handsome when I send the box around collecting; and you may
depend upon being all the better for its contents. And, besides that, I
will write out the story itself to amuse your children. Poor dears! How
pleased they will be with it! 'Gringalet and Cut-in-Half,'--there's a
title for you! And, bless you, it is so virtuous and moral that an abbé
might read it from his pulpit! So make yourself quite happy in every
respect."

"One thing gives me great pleasure, dear brother, and that is to see
that your disposition keeps you from being as unhappy as the rest of
your companions here."

"Why, I am quite sure if I were like a poor fellow who is a prisoner in
our ward, I should be tempted to lay violent hands on myself. Poor young
man! I really am sorry for him,--he seems so very wretched; and I am
seriously afraid that before the day is over he will have sustained some
serious mischief at the hands of the other prisoners, whom he refuses to
associate with, and they owe him a grudge for it; and I know that a plan
is arranged to serve him out this very evening."

"Dear me, how shocking! But you, brother, do not mean to take any part
in it, I hope?"

"No, thank you, I am not such a fool; I should be sure to catch some of
the good things intended for another. All I know about it I picked up
while going to and fro. I heard them talking among themselves of gagging
him to hinder him from crying out, and in order to prevent any one from
seeing what is going on they mean to form a circle around him, making
believe to be listening to one of their party, who should pretend to be
reading a newspaper or anything they liked out loud."

"But why should they thus ill-treat the poor man?"

"Because, as he is always alone, never speaks to any person, and seems
to hold everybody in disgust, they have taken it into their heads he is
a spy, which is immensely stupid on their parts, because a spy would
naturally hook on with them the better to find out all they said and
did; but I believe that the principal cause of their spite against him
is that he has the air of a gentleman, which is a thing they hold in
abhorrence. It is the captain of the dormitory, who is known by the name
of the Walking Skeleton, who is at the head of this plot; and he is like
a wild beast after this Germain, for so the object of their dislike is
called. But let them all do as they like; it is no affair of mine. I can
be of no use, therefore let them go their own way. But then you see,
Jeanne, it is of no use being dull and mopish in prison, or the others
are sure to suspect you of something or other. They never had to find
fault with my want of sociability, and for that reason never suspected
me or owed me a grudge. But come, my girl, you had better return home;
we have gossiped long enough. I know very well how it takes up your time
to come hither. I have nothing to do but to idle away my days; it is
very different with you; so good night. Come and see me again when you
can; you know how happy it always makes me."

"Nay, but, brother, pray do not go yet; I wish you to stay."

"Nonsense, Jeanne; your children are wanting you at home. I say--I hope
you have not told the poor, dear, little innocent things that their
'nunky' is in prison?"

"No, indeed, I have not; the children believe you are abroad, and as
such I can always talk to them of you."

"That's all right. Now then, be off, and get back to your family and
your employment as fast as you can."

"But listen to me, brother,--my poor Fortuné. I have not much to give,
God knows! but still I cannot bear to see you in so deplorable a plight
as you are at present. Your feet must be half frozen without any
stockings; and that wretched old waistcoat you have on makes my heart
ache to see it. Catherine and I together will manage to get a few things
together for you. You know, Fortuné, that at least we do not want for
good will--to--"

"To what--to give me better clothes? Lord love you, I've got boxes full
of everything you can mention, and directly they come I shall be able to
dress like a prince! There, now; come, give me one little
smile,--there's a good girl! You won't? Well, then, you shall make me
and bring me what you like; only remember, directly the tale of
'Gringalet and Cut-in-Half' has replenished my money-box, I am to return
all you expend upon me. And now once more, dear Jeanne, fare you well!
And the next time you come to see me, may I lose the name of
Pique-Vinaigre if I don't make you laugh! But be off now; cut your
stick, there's a good girl! I know I have kept you too long already."

"No, no, dear brother, indeed you have not. Pray hear what I have to
say!"

"Hallo, here! I say, my fine fellow," cried Pique-Vinaigre to the
turnkey, who was waiting in the lobby, "I have said my say, and I want
to go in again. I've talked till I'm tired."

"Oh, Fortuné," cried Jeanne, "how cruel you are to send me thus from
you!"

"No, no; on the contrary, I am kinder than you give me credit for."

"Good-bye; keep up your spirits; and to-morrow morning tell the children
you have been dreaming of their uncle who is abroad, and that he desired
you to give his kind love to them. There--good-bye--good-bye!"

"Good-bye, Fortuné!" replied the poor woman, bursting into tears, as her
brother entered the interior of the prison.

From the moment when the bailiff seated himself between her and Jeanne,
Rigolette had been unable to overhear a word more of the conversation
between Pique-Vinaigre and his sister; but she continued to gaze
intently on the latter, her thoughts busied with devising some plausible
pretext for obtaining the poor woman's address, for the purpose of
recommending her as a fit object for Rodolph's benevolence. As Jeanne
rose from her seat to quit the place, Rigolette timidly approached her,
and said, in a kind voice:

"Pray excuse my addressing you, but a little while ago I could not avoid
overhearing your conversation, and by that I found that you were a maker
of fringe and fancy trimmings."

"You heard rightly," replied Jeanne, somewhat surprised, but, at the
same time, much prepossessed in favour of the open, frank expression of
Rigolette's charming countenance, as well as won to confidence by her
kind and friendly manner.

"And I," continued Rigolette, "am a dressmaker. And just now that
fringes and gimps are so much worn, I am frequently requested by my
customers to get a particular sort for them; so it occurred to me that
perhaps you who make at home could supply me with what I required
cheaper than the shops, while, on the other hand, you might obtain a
better price from me than you get from the warehouse you work for."

"Certainly, I should make a small profit by buying the silk myself, and
then making it up to order. You are very kind to have made me the
proposal; but I own I feel unable to account for your being so well
acquainted with my manner of gaining a living."

"Oh, I will soon explain all that to you. You must know I am waiting to
see the person I came here to visit. Being quite alone, I could not
help hearing all you said to your brother,--of your many trials, also of
your dear children. So then, thinks I to myself, poor people should
always be ready to assist each other. I hope you believe that I did not
try to listen? And after that gentleman came and placed himself between
us, I lost all that passed between your brother and yourself. So I tried
to hit upon some way of being useful to you, and then it struck me that
you being a fancy trimming-maker, I might be able to put work in your
way more profitable than working for shops,--they pay so very little.
So, if you are agreeable, we will take each other's address. This is
where I live; now please to tell me where to send to you directly I have
any work for you."

With these words Rigolette presented one of her businesslike cards to
the sister of Pique-Vinaigre, who, deeply touched by the words and
conduct of the grisette, exclaimed with much feeling:

"Your face does not belie your kind heart; and pray do not set it down
for vanity if I say that there is something about you that reminds me so
forcibly of my eldest daughter that when you first came in I could not
help looking at you several times. I am very much obliged to you; and
should you give me any work, you may rely on my doing it in my best
possible manner. My name is Jeanne Duport, and I live at No. 1 Rue de la
Barillerie,--No. 1, that is not a difficult number to recollect."

"Thank you, madame."

"Nay, 'tis rather for me to express thanks for having had the goodness
even to think of serving a stranger like myself. But still I cannot help
saying it does surprise me to be taken notice of by a young person like
you, who most likely has never known what trouble was."

"But, my dear Madame Duport," cried Rigolette, with a winning smile,
"there is really nothing so astonishing in the affair. Since you fancy I
bear some resemblance to your daughter Catherine, why should you be
surprised at my wish to do a good action?"

"What a dear, sweet creature it is!" cried Madame Duport, with
unaffected warmth. "Well, thanks to you, I shall return home less sad
than I expected; and perhaps we may have the pleasure of meeting here
again before long, for I believe you, like me, come to this dreadful
place to visit a prisoner?"

"Yes, indeed, I do," replied Rigolette, with a sigh, which seemed to
proceed from the very bottom of her heart.

"Then farewell for the present; we shall very shortly meet again, I
hope, Mlle.--Rigolette!" said Jeanne Duport, after having referred for
the necessary information to the card she held in her hand.

"Oh, yes, I'm sure I trust so, too. Good-bye, then, till we meet again,
Madame Duport."

"Well," thought Rigolette, as she returned and reseated herself on the
bench, "at least I know this poor woman's address; and I feel quite sure
M. Rodolph will assist her directly he knows what trouble she is in, for
he always told me whenever I heard of a case of real distress to let him
know, and I am sure this is one if ever there was." And here Rigolette
suddenly changed the current of her ideas by wondering when it would be
her turn to ask to see Germain.

A few words as to the preceding scene. Unfortunately it must be
confessed that the indignation of the unhappy brother of Jeanne Duport
was quite legitimate. Yes, when he said that the law was too dear for
the poor he spoke the truth. To plead before the civil tribunals incurs
enormous expenses, impossible for workpeople to meet when they can
scarcely subsist on the wages they earn.

Ought not civil as well as criminal justice to be accessible to all?
When persons are too poor to be able to invoke the benefits of any law
which is eminently preservative and beneficial, ought not society at its
own cost to enable them to attain it out of respect for the honour and
repose of families?

But let us speak no longer of the woman who must be, for all her life,
the victim of a brutal and depraved husband, and speak of Jeanne
Duport's brother. This freed prisoner leaves a den of corruption to
reënter the world; he had submitted to his punishment, payed his debt by
expiation. What precaution has society taken to prevent him from falling
again into crime? None! If the freed convict has the courage to resist
evil temptations, he will give himself up to one of those homicidal
trades of which we have spoken.

Then the condition of the freed convict is much more terrible, painful,
and difficult than it was before he committed his first fault. He is
surrounded by perils and rocks,--he must have refusal, disdain, and
often even the deepest misery. And if he relapses and commits a second
crime, you are more severe towards him than for his first fault a
thousand times. This is unjust, for it is always the necessity you
impose on him that makes him commit the second crime. Yes, for it is
demonstrated that, instead of correcting, your penitentiary system
depraves; instead of ameliorating, it renders worse; instead of curing
slight moral defects, it renders them incurable.

The severe punishment inflicted on offenders for the second time would
be just and logical if your prisons, rendered moral, purified the
prisoners, and if, at the termination of their punishment, good conduct
was, if not easy, at least possible for them. If we are astonished at
the contradictions of the law, what is it when we compare certain
offences with certain crimes, either from the inevitable consequences,
or from the immense disproportions which exist between the punishments,
awarded to each?

The conversation of the prisoner who came to see the bailiff will
present one of these overwhelming contrasts.




CHAPTER VII.

MAÎTRE BOULARD.


The prisoner who entered the reception-room at the moment when
Pique-Vinaigre left it was a man about thirty, with reddish brown hair,
a jovial countenance, florid and full; and his short stature made his
excessive fatness still more conspicuous. This prisoner, so rosy and
plump, was attired in a long and warm dressing-gown of gray kersey, with
pantaloons of the same down to his feet. A kind of cap of red velvet,
called _Perinet-Leclerc_, completed this personage's costume, when we
add that his feet were thrust into comfortable furred slippers. His gold
chain supported a number of handsome seals with valuable stones, and
several rings with real stones shone on the red fingers of the _détenu_,
who was called Maître Boulard, a _huissier_ (a law-officer), and accused
of breach of trust.

The person who had come to see him was, as we have said, Pierre Bourdin,
one of the _gardes de commerce_ (bailiffs) employed to arrest poor
Morel, the lapidary. This bailiff was usually employed by Maître
Boulard, the _huissier_ of M. Petit-Jean, the man of straw of Jacques
Ferrand.

Bourdin, shorter and quite as stout as the _huissier_, formed himself on
the model of his employer, whose magnificence he greatly admired. Very
fond as he was of jewelry, he wore on this occasion a superb topaz pin,
and a long gilt chain was visible through the buttonholes of his
waistcoat.

"Good day, my faithful friend, Bourdin, I was sure you would not fail
to come at my summons!" said Maître Boulard, in a joyful tone, and in a
small, shrill voice, which contrasted singularly with his large carcass
and full-moon face.

"Fail at your summons!" replied the bailiff; "I am incapable of such
behaviour, _mon général_."

This was the appellation by which Bourdin, with a joke at once familiar
and respectful, called the _huissier_, under whose orders he acted; this
military appellation being very frequently used amongst certain classes
of clerks and civil practitioners.

"I observe with pleasure that friendship remains faithful to
misfortune!" said Maître Boulard, with gay cordiality. "However, I was
getting a little uneasy, as three days had elapsed, and no Bourdin."

"Only imagine, _mon général_!--it is really quite a history. You
remember that dashing vicomte in the Rue de Chaillot?"

"Saint-Remy?"

"Yes; you know how he laughed at all our attempts to 'nab' him?"

"Yes; he behaved very ill in that way."

"Well, this vicomte has got another title."

"What, is he a comte?"

"No, but from swindler he has become thief!"

"Ah, bah!"

"They are after him for some diamonds he has stolen; and, by the way,
they belonged to the jeweller who used to employ that vermin of a Morel,
the lapidary we were going to arrest in the Rue du Temple, when a tall,
thin chap, with black moustaches, paid for this half-starved devil, and
very nearly pitched me and Malicorne headlong down-stairs."

"Ah, yes, yes, I remember; you told me all about it, Bourdin,--it was
really very droll! But as to this dashing vicomte?"

"Why, as I tell you, Saint-Remy was charged with robbery, after having
made his worthy old father believe that he wished to blow out his
brains. A police agent of my acquaintance, knowing that I had been long
on the traces of the vicomte, asked me if I could not give him
information so that he could 'grab' the dandy. I had learned (too late
for myself) that he had 'run to earth' in a farm at Arnouville, five
leagues from Paris; but when we got there the bird had flown!"

"But next day he paid that acceptance,--thanks, as I have heard say, to
some rich woman!"

"Yes, general; but still I knew the nest, and he might have gone there
again, and so I told my friend in the police. He proposed to me to give
him a friendly cast of my office and show him the farm, and as I had
nothing to do and it was a rural trip, I agreed."

"Well, and the vicomte?"

"Not to be found. After having lurked about the farm for some time, we
gained admittance, and returned as wise as we went; and this is why I
could not come to your orders sooner, general."

"I was sure it was something of this sort, my good fellow."

"But, if I may be allowed to ask, how the devil did you get here?"

"Wretches, my dear fellow, a set of wretches who, for a miserable sixty
thousand francs of which they declare I have wronged them, have charged
me with a breach of trust and compelled me to resign my office."

"Really, general! Well, that's unfortunate! And shall I then work for
you no longer?"

"I am on half pay now, Bourdin,--on the retired list."

"But who are these vindictive persons?"

"Why, only imagine, one of the most savage of all is a liberated
convict, who employed me to recover the amount of a bill of seven
hundred miserable francs, for which it was requisite to bring an action.
Well, I brought the action, and got the money and used it; and because,
in consequence of some unsuccessful speculations, I swamped that money
and several other sums, all these blackguards have assailed me with
warrants; and so you find me here, my dear fellow, neither more nor less
than a malefactor."

"And does it not alarm you, general?"

"Yes; but the oddest thing of all is that this convict wrote me word
some days ago that this money being his sole resource for bad times, and
these bad times having arrived (I don't know what he means by that), I
was responsible for the crimes he might commit in order to escape from
starvation."

"Amusing, 'pon my soul!"

"Very; and the fellow is capable of saying this, but fortunately the law
does not recognise any such accompliceships."

"After all, you are only charged with breach of trust?"

"That is all. Do you take me for a thief, Maître Bourdin?"

"Oh, dear general! I meant to say there was nothing very serious in
this."

"Why, I don't look very down, do I, my boy?"

"By no means; never saw you looking better. Indeed, if you are found
guilty, you will only have two or three months, imprisonment and
twenty-five francs fine. I know the law, you see!"

"And these two or three months I shall contrive, I know, to pass quietly
in some infirmary. I have a deputy at my elbow."

"Oh, then, you're all right."

"Yes, Bourdin; and I can scarcely help laughing to think what little
good the fools who put me here have done themselves,--they will not
recover a sou of the money they claim. They compel me to sell my
post,--what do I care?"

"True, general; it is only so much the worse for them."

"Yes, my boy. And now for the subject on which I was anxious to see you,
Bourdin; it is a very delicate affair,--there is a lady in the case!"
said Maître Boulard, with mysterious self-complacency.

"Oh, you gay deceiver! But, be it what it may, you may rely on me."

"I am greatly interested in the welfare of a young actress at the
theatre of the Folies-Dramatiques. I pay her rent; but, you know, the
absent are always in the wrong! Alexandrine has applied to me for money.
Now I have never been a very gay fellow, but yet I do not like to be
made a fool of; so, before I comply, I should like to know if the lady
is faithful. I know there is nothing more absurd and uncommon than
fidelity, and so you will do me a friendly service if you could just
watch her for a few days and let me know your opinion, either by a talk
with the porter at her abode or--"

"I understand, general," said Bourdin; "this is no worse than watching a
debtor. Rely on me; I will have an eye to Mlle. Alexandrine,--although,
I should say, you are too generous and too good-looking not to be
adored!"

"My good looks are no use, my friend, so long as I am absent; and so I
rely on you to discover the truth."

"Rely on me."

"How can I, my dear fellow, prove my gratitude?"

"Don't mention it, general."

"Pray understand, my dear Bourdin, that your fees in this case will be
the same as if you were after an arrest."

"I can't allow it, general. As long as I act under your orders, have you
not allowed me to shear the debtor to his very skin,--to double, treble,
the costs of arrests? And have you not sued for those costs for me as
eagerly as if they were due to yourself?"

"But, my dear fellow, this is very different; and, in my turn, I declare
I will not allow it."

"_Mon général_, you will really make me quite ashamed if you do not
allow me to make these inquiries as to Mlle. Alexandrine as a poor proof
of my gratitude."

"Well, well; be it so. I will no longer contend with your generosity;
and your devotion will be a sweet reward to me for considerations I have
always mixed up in our transactions."

"Very good, general; and now we understand each other. Is there anything
else I can do for you? You must be very uncomfortable here. I hope you
are _à la pistole_ (in a private room)?"

"Yes; I came just in time to get the only empty room,--the others are
being repaired. I have made myself as comfortable as possible in my
cell, and am not so very miserable. I have a stove and a very nice easy
chair; I make three long meals a day, and my digestion is good; then I
walk and go to sleep. Except my uneasiness about Alexandrine I have not
so much to complain of."

"But for you who were such an epicure, general, the prison diet is very
poor."

"Why, there is an excellent cookshop in my street, and I have a running
account with him, and so every two days he sends me a very nice supply.
And, by the way, I would get you to ask his wife--a nice little woman is
Madame Michonneau--to put into the basket a bit of pickled thunny. It is
in season now, and relishes one's wine."

"Capital idea!"

"And tell Madame Michonneau to send me a basket of various
wines,--burgundy, champagne, and bordeaux,--like the last; she'll know
what I mean. And tell her to put in two bottles of old cognac of 1817,
and a pound of pure Mocha, fresh roasted and ground."

"I'll put down the date of the cognac, lest I should forget it," said
Bourdin, taking a memorandum-book from his pocket.

"As you are writing, my good fellow, be so good as make a minute of my
wish to have an eider-down quilt from my house."

"All shall be done to the letter, general; make your mind easy. And now
I shall be comfortable about your living. But your walks; you are
compelled to take them along with those ruffians confined here?"

"Yes; and it's really very lively and animated. I go down after
breakfast; sometimes I go into one yard, sometimes another, and I mix
with the mob. Really they appear very good sort of fellows! Some of them
are very amusing. The most ferocious are collected in what is called the
Fosse aux Lions. Ah, my good fellow, what hang-dog-looking fellows there
are amongst them. There's one they call the Skeleton,--I never saw such
a creature."

"What a singular name!"

"He is so thin, or rather bare of flesh, that this is the nickname which
has been given to him; he is really frightful. He is, besides, director
of his ward, and, moreover, an infernal villain. He has just left the
galleys, and went directly to murder and assassination. But his last
murder was really horrible, as he knew he should be condemned to death
without chance of remission; but he laughs at it."

"What a scoundrel!"

"All the prisoners admire and tremble before him. I got into his good
graces at once by offering him some cigars, and so he made a friend of
me at once, and offered to teach me slang; and I have made considerable
progress."

"Oh, what an idea!--my general learning slang!"

"I amuse myself as much as I can, and all these fellows adore me. I am
not proud like a young fellow they call Germain, who gives himself the
airs of a lord."

"But he must be delighted at meeting with such a gentleman as you, even
if he is disgusted with the others."

"Why, really, he did not seem even to notice that I was there; but, if
he had, I should have taken care how I took any notice of him. He is the
_bête noire_ of the whole prison, and some day or other they'll play him
a slippery trick; and, _pardieu!_ I have no wish to come in for my share
of what may befall him."

"You're right."

"It would interfere with my pleasures, for my walk with the prisoners is
really a pleasure to me; only these ruffians have no great opinion of me
morally. You see, my accusation of a simple breach of trust is
contemptible in the eyes of these out-and-outers; and they look on me as
a nobody."

"Why, really, with such criminals you are--"

"A mere chicken, my dear fellow. But do not forget my commissions."

"Make your mind easy, general. First, Mlle. Alexandrine; second, the
fish-pie and basket of wine; third, the old cognac of 1817, the ground
coffee, and the eider-down quilt; you shall have it all. Is there
anything else?"

"Yes, I forgot. You know the address of M. Badinot?"

"The agent? Yes."

"Well, be so kind as to call on him, and say that I rely on his
friendship to find me a barrister such as my case requires, and that I
shall not stand for forty or fifty pounds."

"I'll see M. Badinot, depend upon it, general; and all your commissions
shall be attended to this evening, and to-morrow you shall receive all
you wish for. So good day, and a happy meeting to us soon, _mon
général_."

"Good-bye, my worthy friend!" And the prisoner quitted the parlour at
one door, and the visitor by the other.

       *       *       *       *       *

Let us now compare the crime of Pique-Vinaigre with that of M. Boulard,
the _huissier_. Compare the beginning of the two, and the reasons, the
necessities, which impelled them to evil. Compare, too, the punishment
which awaited them respectively. The one, driven by his hunger and need,
robs. He is apprehended, judged, and sentenced to fifteen or twenty
years of hard labour and exposure. Property is sacred, and he who, in
the night, breaks for plunder should undergo sacred punishment. But
ought not the well-informed, intelligent, rich man who robs--not to
satisfy hunger, but his caprices or gambling in the stocks--to be
punished? Yet for the public spoliator there is two months'
imprisonment; for the relapsed convict twenty years' hard labour and
exposure. What can we add to these facts, which speak for themselves?

       *       *       *       *       *

The old turnkey kept his word; and when Boulard left the parlour,
Germain entered, and Rigolette was only separated from him by a light
wire grating.




CHAPTER VIII.

FRANÇOIS GERMAIN.


Although the features of Germain could not be styled regular, it was
scarcely possible to see a more interesting countenance. There was an
air of ease and elegance about him, while his slight, graceful figure,
plain but neatly arranged dress (consisting of a pair of gray trousers
and black frock coat, buttoned up to the chin), formed a striking
contrast to the slovenliness and neglect to which the occupants of the
prison generally gave themselves up; his white hands and well-trimmed
nails evinced an attention to his personal appearance which had still
further excited the ill-will of the prisoners against him, for bodily
neglect is almost invariably the accompaniment of moral perversion. He
wore his long and naturally curling chestnut hair parted on one side of
his forehead, according to the fashion of the day, a style that well
became his pale and melancholy countenance, and large, clear blue eyes,
beaming with truth and candour; his smile, at once sweet and mournful,
expressed benevolence of heart, mingled with a habitual dejection, for,
though young, the unfortunate youth had already deeply tasted
affliction.

Nothing could be imagined more touching than the look of suffering
impressed on his features, while the gentle and resigned cast of his
whole physiognomy was but a fair transcript of the mind within, for a
better, purer, or more upright heart could scarcely have beaten in human
form.

The very cause of his imprisonment (divested of the calumnious
aggravations affixed to it by Jacques Ferrand) proved the goodness of
his nature, and left him worthy of blame only for suffering himself to
be led astray by his feelings to commit an action decidedly wrong, but
still excusable if it be remembered that the son of Madame Georges felt
perfectly sure of replacing on the following morning the sum temporarily
taken from the notary's cash-box, for the purpose of saving Morel the
lapidary, from being dragged from his family and confined in a prison.

Germain coloured slightly as he perceived, through the grating of the
visitor's room, the bright and charming countenance of Rigolette, who
strove, as usual, to appear gay, in hopes of encouraging and enlivening
her protégé a little; but the poor girl was too bad a dissembler to
conceal the sorrow and agitation she invariably experienced upon
entering the prison. She was seated on a bench at the outside of the
grating, holding her straw basket on her lap.

Instead of remaining in the adjoining passage, from whence every word
could be heard, the old turnkey retired to the stove placed at the very
extremity of the visiting-room, closed his eyes, and in a very few
seconds was (as his breathing announced) fast asleep, leaving Germain
and Rigolette at perfect liberty to converse at their ease.

"Now then, M. Germain," cried the grisette, placing her pretty face as
closely as she could to the grate, the better to examine the features of
her friend, "let me see what sort of a countenance you have got to-day,
and whether it is less sad than it was? Humph, humph--only middling!
Now, do you know that I've a great mind to be very angry with you?"

"Oh, no, you are too good for that. But how very kind of you to come
again so soon!"

"So soon! Does it seem to you so soon? You mean by those words to
reproach me for coming so frequently. Well--"

"Have I not good cause to find fault with you for taking so much pains
and trouble for me, while I, alas! can merely thank you for all your
goodness?"

"That is a little mistake of yours, my fussy friend, because the little
services in my power to render you afford me quite as much pleasure as
they do you; so that, you see, I am as much bound to say 'Thank you for
all favours,' as you are. So, you see, I am not to be cheated that way.
And now I think of it, the best way to punish you for such very improper
ideas will be not to give you what I have brought for you."

"What! Another proof of your thoughtful care of me? Oh, you spoil
me--you do, indeed! I shall be fit for nothing but to be somebody's pet
when (if ever, alas!) I get out of prison. A thousand thanks! Nay, you
must pardon my using that word, although it does displease you. But,
indeed, you leave me nothing else to say."

"Ah, but don't be in such a hurry to thank me, before you even know what
I have brought!"

"Why, what do I care what it is?"

"Well, I'm sure that's very civil, M. Germain!"

"Nay, I only meant to say that, be it what it may, it must needs be dear
and precious to me, since it comes from you. Oh, Mlle. Rigolette, your
unwearied kindness, your touching sympathy, fills me with the deepest
gratitude, and--and--" But finding it impossible to conclude the
sentence, Germain cast down his eyes and remained silent.

"Well," said Rigolette, "and what else?"

"And--devotion!" stammered out Germain.

"Why could you not have said 'respect,' as people write at the end of a
letter?" asked Rigolette, impatiently. "Ah, but I know very well that
was not what you were going to say, else why did you stop all of a
sudden?"

"I assure you--"

"There, don't endeavour to assure me of anything; I can see you are
blushing through this grating. Now why can't you speak out, and tell me
every thought and wish of your heart? Am I not your true and faithful
friend as well as old companion?" continued the grisette, timidly, for
she but waited the confession of Germain's love for her to tell him
frankly and sincerely how truly she returned his affection with a
passion as true and as generous as his own.

"I assure you Mlle. Rigolette," said the poor prisoner with a sigh,
"that I had nothing else to say, and that I am concealing nothing
whatever from you."

"For shame for shame," cried Rigolette, stamping her foot; "don't tell
such stories. Now, look here," continued she, drawing a large, white,
woollen neck wrapper from her basket; "do you see this beautiful thing?
Well, I brought it on purpose for you. But now--to punish you for being
so deceitful and sly--I will not give it to you. I knitted it on purpose
for you, too; for, said I, it must be so damp and cold in those yards in
the prison. And this nice, soft, woollen handkerchief is just the thing
to keep him warm; he is so delicate!"

"And is it possible you--"

"Yes, sir, I said you were delicate--and so you are," cried Rigolette,
interrupting him. "I suppose I may recollect, if I please, how chilly
you used to be of an evening, though all the time you tried to conceal
it, that you might hinder me from putting more wood on my fire when you
came to sit with me. I've got a good memory, I can tell you; so don't
contradict me."

"And so have I," replied Germain, in a voice of deep feeling "far too
good for my present position;" and, with these words, he passed his hand
across his eyes.

"Now then, I declare, I believe you are falling into low spirits again,
though I so strictly forbade it."

"How is it possible for me to avoid being moved even to tears, when I
recollect all you have done for me ever since I entered this prison? And
is not your last kind attention another proof of your amiable care for
me? And do I not know that you are obliged to work at night to make up
for the time it occupies for you to visit me in my misfortunes, and that
on my account you impose additional labour and fatigue on yourself?"

"Oh, if that be all you have to be miserable about I beg you will make
very short work of it. Truly, I deserve a great deal of pity for taking
a nice refreshing walk two or three times a week just to see a friend--I
who so dearly love walking--and having a good stare at all the pretty
shops as I come along."

"And see, to-day, too, what weather you have ventured out in! Such wind
and rain! Oh, it is too selfish of me to permit you thus to sacrifice
your health for me!"

"Oh, bless you, the wind and rain only make the walk more amusing. You
have no idea what very droll sights one sees,--first comes a party of
men holding on their hats with both hands, to prevent the storm from
carrying them away; then you see an unfortunate individual with his
umbrella blown inside out, making the most ludicrous grimaces, and
shutting his eyes while the wind drives him about like a peg-top. I
declare, all the way I came along this morning, it was more diverting
than going to a play. I thought I should make you laugh by telling you
of it; but there you are looking more dull, and solid, and serious than
ever!"

"Pray forgive me if I cannot be as mirthful as your kind heart would
have me; you know I never have what is styled high spirits, and just now
I feel it impossible even to affect them."

Rigolette was very desirous of concealing that, spite of her lively
prattle, she was to the full as sad and heavy-hearted as Germain
himself could be. She therefore hastened to change the conversation by
saying:

"You say it is impossible for you to conquer your low spirits, but there
are other things you choose to style impossibilities I have begged and
prayed of you to do, because I very well know you could, if you chose."

"What do you mean?"

"I mean your obstinate avoidance of all the other prisoners, and never
speaking to one of them; the turnkey has just been talking to me about
it, and he says that for your own sake you ought to associate with them
a little. I am sure it would not do you any harm; you do not speak; it
is always the way. I see very well you will never be satisfied till
these dreadful men have played you some dangerous trick in revenge."

"You know not the horror with which they inspire me, any more than you
can guess the personal reasons I have for avoiding and execrating them,
and all who resemble them."

"Indeed, but I do know your reasons! I read the accounts you wrote for
me, and which I went to fetch away from your lodgings after your
imprisonment; from them I learned all the dangers you had incurred upon
your arrival in Paris, because, when you were in the country, you
refused to participate in the crimes of the bad man who had brought you
up; and that it was in consequence of the last snare they laid to catch
you that you quitted the Rue du Temple, without telling any one but me
where you had gone to. And I read something else, too, in those papers,"
said Rigolette, casting down her eyes, while a bright blush dyed her
cheeks; "I read things that--that--"

"You would never have known, I solemnly declare," exclaimed Germain,
eagerly, "had it not been for the misfortune which befell me. But let me
ask you to be as generous as you are good; forget and pardon my past
follies, my insane hopes. 'Tis true, in times past I ventured to
indulge such dreams, wild and unfounded as they were."

Rigolette had endeavoured a second time to draw a confession of his love
from the lips of Germain by alluding to those tender and passionate
effusions written by him, and dedicated to the remembrance of the
grisette, for whom, as we have before stated, he had always felt the
sincerest affection; but, the better to preserve the confiding
familiarity with which he was treated by his pretty neighbour, he
concealed his regard under the semblance of friendship.

Rendered more timid and sensitive by imprisonment, he could not for an
instant believe it possible for Rigolette to reciprocate the attachment
of a poor prisoner like himself, whose character was, moreover,
tarnished by so foul an accusation as he laboured under, while previous
to this calamity she had never manifested more than a sisterly interest
in him. The grisette, finding herself so little understood, stifled a
sigh, and awaited with hopeful eagerness a better opportunity of opening
the eyes of Germain to the real state of her heart. She contented
herself, therefore, with merely replying:

"To be sure, it is quite natural the sight of these wicked men should
fill you with horror and disgust; but that is no reason for your
exposing yourself to unnecessary dangers."

"I assure you that, in order to follow your advice, I have endeavoured
to force myself to converse with such as seemed the least depraved among
them; but you can form no notion what dreadful men they are, or what
shocking language they talk."

"I dare say they do, poor unfortunate creatures! It must be horrid to
hear them."

"But there is something more terrible than that, the getting gradually
used to the disgusting conversations which, in spite of yourself, you
are compelled to hear all day long. Yes, I am sorry to say, I now hear
with gloomy indifference horrible remarks and speeches that would have
excited my utmost indignation when I first came here. So, you see,"
continued Germain, bitterly, "I begin to be more afraid of myself than I
am of them."

"Oh, M. Germain!"

"I am sure of it," pursued the unfortunate young man. "After a residence
within a prison in company with such as are always to be found assembled
there, the mind becomes accustomed to guilty thoughts, in the same
manner as the ear gets inured to the coarse and vulgar expressions
continually in use. Oh, God, I can well believe how possible it is to
enter these walls innocent of the crimes ascribed to one, and to leave
them with principles utterly and irretrievably perverted!"

"But you never could be so changed! Oh, no, not you!"

"Ay, me, and others twenty times better than myself! Alas, alas! those
who condemn men to this fearful association little think that they
expose their fellow creatures to breathe an air laden with the direst
moral contagion, and inevitably fatal to every right or honourable
feeling!"

"Pray do not go on so! You know not how you grieve me!"

"Nay, I but wished to explain to you why I am daily more and more
melancholy. I wished not to have said so much, but I have only one way
of repaying the pity you have evinced for me."

"Pity? Pity? Indeed--"

"Pardon me for interrupting you, but the only way by which I can acquit
myself towards you is to speak with perfect candour; and, with
shuddering alarm, I confess that I am no longer the same person I was.
In vain do I fly these unfortunate wretches, their very presence, their
contact seems to take effect on me; in spite of myself, I seem to feel a
fatal influence in breathing the same atmosphere, as though the moral
pestilence entered at every pore, and rested not till it had mingled
with the heart's blood. Should I even be acquitted on my trial, the very
sight of, and association with, good and virtuous men would cover me
with shame and confusion; for, though I have not yet been able to find
pleasure in the society of my companions, I have, at least, learned to
dread the day when I shall again mix with persons of respectability,
because now I am conscious of my weakness and cowardice; for is not he
guilty of both who dares to make a compromise with his duties or his
honesty? And have not I done so? When I first came here I did not
deceive myself as to the extent of my fault, however excusable the
circumstances under which it was committed might have seemed to make it;
but now it appears to me an offence of a trifling description when
compared with the crimes of which the robbers and murderers by whom I am
surrounded make daily boast. And I sometimes surprise myself envying
their audacious indifference, and blaming myself with my own weak
regrets for so insignificant an action."

"And so it was an insignificant action, far more generous than wrong.
Why, what did you do but borrow for a few hours a sum of money you knew
you could replace on the following morning; and that, too, not for
yourself, but to save a whole family from ruin, perhaps death."

"That matters not, it was a theft in the eyes of the law and all honest
men. Doubtless it is better to rob with a good motive than a bad one,
but it is a fearful thing to be obliged to seek an excuse for oneself by
comparing one's own guilt with that of persons far beneath ourselves. I
can no longer venture to compare my actions with those of upright
persons, consequently, then, I am compelled to institute a comparison
between myself and the degraded beings with whom I live; so that I
plainly perceive in the end the conscience becomes hardened and is put
to sleep. The next theft I commit, probably without the prospect of
replacing the money, but from mere cupidity, I might still find an
excuse for myself by comparing my conduct with that of a man who adds
murder to theft; and yet at this moment there is as great a difference
between me and a murderer as there is between a person of untainted
character and myself. So, because there are beings a thousand times more
degraded and debased than I am, by degrees my own degradation would
become diminished in my estimation; instead of being able to say, as I
once could, 'I am as honest a man as any I meet with,' I shall be
obliged to content myself with saying I am the least guilty of the vile
wretches among whom I am condemned for ever to live."

"Oh, do not say for ever! Once released from this place--"

"What should I gain even then? The lost creatures by whom I am
surrounded are perfectly well acquainted with my person, and, were I
even to be set free, I am exposed to the chance of meeting them again,
and being hailed as a prison associate; and even though the fact of my
imprisonment might be unknown, these unprincipled beings would be for
ever threatening me to divulge it, thereby holding me completely in
their power, by bands too firm for me to hope to break; while, on the
other hand, had I been kept confined in my cell until my trial, they
would have known nothing of me, or I of them; so that I should have
escaped the fears which may paralyse my best resolutions. And, besides,
had I been permitted to contemplate my fault in the solitude of my cell,
instead of decreasing in my eyes, its enormity would have appeared still
greater; and in the same proportion would the expiation I proposed to
make have been augmented; and as my sin grew more and more apparent to
my unbiassed view, so also would my earnest determination to atone for
it by every means my humble sphere afforded have been strengthened; for
well I know it takes a hundred good deeds to efface the recollection of
one bad.

"But how can I ever expect to turn my thoughts towards expiating a crime
which scarcely awakens in me the smallest remorse? I tell you again--and
I feel what I say--that I seem acting under some irresistible influence,
against which I have long and fruitlessly struggled. I was brought up
for evil, and, alone, friendless, and powerless to resist, I yield to my
destiny. What matters it whether that destiny be accomplished by honest
or dishonest means? Yet Heaven knows my thoughts and intentions were
ever pure and upright; and I felt the greater satisfaction in the
possession of an unsullied reputation, from recollection of all the
attempts that had been made to lead me to a life of infamy; and mine has
been a course of infinite difficulty while seeking to free myself from
the odious wretches who wished to degrade me, and render me as vile as
themselves.

"But what avails my having been a person of unblemished honour and
unspotted reputation? What am I now? Oh, dreadful, dreadful contrast!"
exclaimed the unhappy prisoner, in an agony of tears and sobs, which
drew a plenteous shower of sympathising drops from the tender-hearted
grisette, who, guided by her natural right-mindedness, her woman's wit,
as well as warmed by her deep affection for Germain, clearly perceived
that, although as yet her protégé had lost none of the scrupulous
notions of honour and probity he had ever entertained, yet that he spoke
truly when he expressed his dread that the day might come when he would
behold with guilty indifference those words and actions he now shuddered
even to think of.

Drying her eyes, therefore, and addressing Germain, who was still
leaning his forehead against the grating, she said, in a voice and
manner more touchingly serious than Germain had ever before observed:

"Listen to me, Germain! I shall not, perhaps, be able to express myself
as I could wish, for I am not a good speaker like you, but what I do say
is uttered in all sincerity and truth; but first I must tell you you
have no right to call yourself alone and friendless."

"Oh, think not I can ever forget all your generous compassion has
induced you to do to serve me!"

"Just now, when you used the word pity, I did not interrupt you; but now
that you repeat the word, or at least one quite as bad, I must tell you
quite plainly that I feel neither pity nor compassion for you, but quite
a different--Stay, I will try and explain myself as well as I can. While
we were next-door neighbours, I felt for you all the regard due to one I
esteemed as a friend and brother. We mutually aided each other; you
shared with me all your Sunday amusements, and I did my very best to
look as well and be as gay and entertaining as I could, in order to show
how much I was gratified; so there again we were quits."

"Quits? Oh, no, no! I--"

"Now, do hold your tongue, and let me speak! I'm sure you have had all
the talk to yourself this long while. When you were obliged to quit the
house we lodged in, I felt more sorrow at your departure than I had ever
done before."

"Is it possible?"

"Yes, indeed, for all the other persons who had lived in your apartments
were careless creatures, whom I did not care a pin for; while you, from
the very first of our acquaintance, seemed just the sort of person I
wanted to be my neighbour, because you could understand that I wished us
to be good friends, and nothing more. Then you were so ready to pass all
your spare time with me, teaching me to write, giving me good advice,--a
little serious, to be sure, but all the better for that. You were ever
kind and good, yet never presumed upon it in any way; and even when
compelled to change your lodging, you confided to me a secret you would
not have trusted to any one else,--the name of your new abode; and that
made me so proud and happy, to think you should have so much reliance on
the silence and friendship of a giddy girl like myself. I used to think
of you so constantly that at last every other person seemed to be
banished from my recollection, and you alone to occupy my memory. Pray
don't turn away as if you did not believe me. You know I always speak
the truth."

"Indeed, indeed, I can scarcely believe that you were kind enough thus
to remember me."

"Oh, but I did, though; and I should have been very ungrateful had I
acted otherwise. Sometimes I used to say to myself, 'M. Germain is the
very nicest young man I know, though he is rather too serious at times;
but never mind that. If I had a friend whom I wished to be very, very
happy when she was married, I certainly should recommend her marrying M.
Germain, who would make just such a husband as a good wife deserves to
meet with.'"

"You remembered me then, it seems, for the sake of bestowing me on
another," murmured poor Germain, almost involuntarily.

"Yes, and I should have been delighted to have helped you to obtain a
good wife, because I felt a real and friendly interest in your
happiness. You see I speak without any reserve; you know I never could
disguise my thoughts."

"Well, I can but thank you for caring enough about me even to wish to
dispose of me in marriage to one of your acquaintances."

"This was the state of things when your troubles came upon you, and you
sent me that poor, dear letter in which you acquainted me with what you
styled your fault, but which, to an ignorant mind like my own, seemed a
noble and generous action. That letter directed me to go and fetch away
your papers, among which I found the confession of your love for me,--a
love you had never ventured to reveal; and there, too," continued
Rigolette, unable longer to restrain her tears, "I learned that, kindly
considering my future prospects (illness or want of employ might render
so distressing), you wished, in the event of your dying a violent death
(as your fears foretold might be the case), to secure to me the trifle
you had accumulated by industry and care."

"I did; and surely if, during my lifetime, you had been overtaken by
sickness or any other misfortune, you would sooner have accepted
assistance from me than from any other living creature, would you not? I
flattered myself so, at least. Tell me, tell--I was right, that to me
you would have turned for succour and support as to any true and devoted
friend?"

"Of course I should! Who else should I have thought of in any hour of
need or sorrow but you, M. Germain?"

"Thanks, thanks! Your words fall like healing drops upon my heart, and
console me for all I have suffered."

"But how shall I attempt to describe to you what I felt while reading
that--oh, it is a dreadful word to utter!--that will, each word of which
breathed only care and solicitude for my future welfare? And yet these
tender, touching proofs of your sincere regard were to have been
concealed from me till your death. Surely it was not strange that
conduct so generous and delicate should at once have converted my
feelings towards you into those of an affection sincere and fervent as
your own for me. That is easily understood, is it not, M. Germain?"

The large dark eyes of Rigolette were fixed on Germain with an
expression so earnest and tender, her sweet voice pronounced the simple
confession of her love in a tone so touchingly true to nature, that
Germain, who had never for one instant flattered himself with having
awakened so warm an interest in the heart of the grisette, gazed on her
for an instant in utter inability to believe the words he heard; then,
as the bright beaming look he encountered conveyed the truth to his
mind, his colour varied from deepest red to deadly pale, he cried out in
a voice quivering with emotion:

"Can it be? Do I hear aright? Ah, repeat those dear words that I may
feel convinced of their reality."

"Why should I hesitate to assure you again and again that when I learned
your kind consideration for me, and remembered how miserable and
wretched you were, I no longer felt for you the calm feelings of
friendship? And certainly, M. Germain," added Rigolette, smilingly,
while a rosy blush mantled her intelligent features, "if I had a friend
now I wished to see well married, I should be very sorry indeed to
recommend her choosing you, because, because--"

"You would marry me yourself!" exclaimed the delighted young man.

"You compel me to tell you so myself, since you will not ask it of me."

"Can this be possible?"

"It is not from not having put you in the direct path more than once to
make you understand. But you will not take a hint, and so, sir, I am
compelled to confess the thing myself. It is wrong, perhaps; but, as
there is no one but yourself to reprove my boldness, I have less fear;
and then," added Rigolette, in a more serious tone, and with tender
emotion, "you just now appeared to me so greatly overcome, so
despairing, that I could no longer repress my feelings; and I had vanity
enough to believe that this avowal, frankly made and from my heart,
would prevent you from being unhappy in future. I said to myself, 'Until
now I had been able to amuse or comfort him--' Ah, _mon Dieu!_ what is
the matter?" exclaimed Rigolette, seeing Germain conceal his face in
his hands. "Is not this cruel?" she added; "whatever I do, whatever I
say, you are still as wretched as ever, and that is being too
unkind--too selfish; it is as if it were you only who suffered from
sorrows!"

"Alas, what misery is mine!" exclaimed Germain, with despair; "you love
me when I am no longer worthy of you."

"Not worthy of me? Why, how can you talk so absurdly? It is just as if I
said that I was not formerly worthy of your friendship because I had
been in prison; for, after all, I have been a prisoner also; but am I
the less an honest girl?"

"But you were in prison because you were a poor forsaken girl; whilst
I--alas, what a difference!"

"Well, then, as to prison, we shall neither of us ever have anything to
reproach each other with. It is I who am the more ambitious of the two;
for, in my position, I have no right to think of any person but a
workman for my husband. I was a foundling, and have nothing but my small
apartment and my good spirits, and yet I come and boldly offer myself to
you as a wife."

"Alas, formerly such a destiny would have been the dream--the happiness
of my life! But now I am under the odium of an infamous accusation; and
should I take advantage of your excessive generosity, your
commiseration, which no doubt misleads you? No, no!"

"But," exclaimed Rigolette, with pained impatience, "I tell you that it
is not pity I feel for you, it is love! I think of you only; I no longer
sleep or eat. Your sad and gentle countenance follows me everywhere. Can
that be pity only? Now, when you speak to me, your voice, your look, go
to my very heart. There are a thousand things in you now which please
me, and which I had not before marked. I like your face, I like your
eyes, your appearance, your disposition, your good heart. Is that pity?
Why, after having loved you as a friend, do I love you as a lover? I
cannot say. Why was I light and gay when I liked you as a friend? Why am
I quite a different being now I love you as a lover? I do not know. Why
have I been so slow in finding you at once handsome and good,--in loving
you at once with eyes and heart? I cannot say--or rather, yes--I can; it
is because I have discovered how much you love me without having told me
of it,--how generous and devoted you were. Then love mounted from my
heart to my eyes, as a tear does when the heart is softened."

"Really, I seem to be in a dream when I hear you speak thus!"

"And I never could have believed that I could have told you all this,
but your despair has forced me to it. Well, sir, now you know I love you
as my friend, my lover--as my husband! Will you still call it pity?"

The generous scruples of Germain were overcome in an instant before this
plain and devoted confession, a hopeful joy prevailed over his painful
reflections.

"You love me?" he cried; "I believe you; your accent, your
look,--everything proclaims it! I will not ask how I have merited such
happiness, but I abandon myself to it blindly; my life, my whole life,
will not suffice to pay my debt to you! Oh, I have greatly suffered
already, but this moment effaces all!"

"Then you will be comforted at last? Oh, I was sure I should contrive to
do so!" cried Rigolette, in a transport of joy.

"And it is in the midst of the horrors of a prison, and when all
conspires to overwhelm me, that such happiness--"

Germain could not conclude. This thought reminded him of the reality of
his position. His scruples, for a moment lost sight of, returned more
severe than ever, and he said, with despair:

"But I am a prisoner--I am accused of robbery; I shall be
sentenced--dishonoured, perhaps! And I cannot accept of your generous
sacrifice--profit by your noble excitement. Oh, no, no; I am not such a
villain as that!"

"What do you say?"

"I may be sentenced to several years' imprisonment."

"Well," replied Rigolette, with calmness and firmness, "they shall see
that I am an honest girl, and they will not refuse to marry us in the
prison chapel."

"But I may be put in prison at a distance from Paris."

"Once your wife, I will follow you and settle in the city where you may
be. I shall find work there, and can see you every day."

"But I shall be disgraced in the eyes of all."

"You love me better than any one--don't you?"

"Can you ask me such a question?"

"Then of what consequence is it? So far from considering you as
disgraced in my eyes, I shall consider you as the victim of your own
kind heart."

"But the world will accuse, condemn, calumniate your choice."

"The world! Are not you the world to me--I to you? So let it say as it
may!"

"Well, quitting prison at length, my life will be precarious--miserable.
Repulsed on all sides, I may, perhaps, find no employment, and then it
is appalling to think! But if this corruption which besets me should
seize on me in spite of myself, what a future for you!"

"You will never grow corrupted. No; for now you know that I love you,
this thought will give you the power of resisting bad examples. You will
reflect that if all repulse you when you quit your prison, your wife
will receive you with love and gratitude, assured, as she will be, that
you will still be an honest man. This language astonishes you, does it
not? It astonishes even myself. I do not know whence I derive all I say
to you; from the bottom of my soul, assuredly--and that must convince
you! That is, if you do not reject an offer made you most unreservedly,
if you do not desire to reject the love of a poor girl who has only--"

Germain interrupted Rigolette with impassioned voice:

"Yes, indeed--I do accept--I do accept! Yes, I feel it. I am assured it
is sometimes cowardly to refuse certain sacrifices; it is to avow
oneself unworthy of them. I accept them, noble, brave girl!"

"Really, really--are you really in earnest?"

"I swear to you; and you have, too, said something which greatly struck
me, and gives me the courage I want."

"Delightful! And what did I say?"

"That, for your sake, I should in future continue an honest man. Yes, in
this thought I shall find strength to resist the detestable influences
which surround me. I shall brave contagion, and know how to keep worthy
of your love the heart which belongs to you."

"Oh, Germain, how happy I am! If I have ever done anything for you, how
you recompense me now!"

"And then, observe, although you excuse my fault I shall never forget
it. My future task will be double: to expiate the past and deserve the
happiness I owe to you. For that I will do my best, and, as poor as I
may be, the opportunity will not fail me, I am sure."

"Alas! that is true; for we always find persons more unfortunate than
ourselves."

"And if we have no money, why--"

"We give our tears, as I did for the poor Morels."

"And that is holy alms. 'Charity of the soul is quite equal to that
which bestows bread.'"

"You accept, then, and will never retract?"

"Never, never, my love--my wife! My courage returns to me, and I seem as
though awaking from a dream, and no longer doubt myself. My heart would
not beat as it does if it had lost its noblest energies."

"Oh, Germain, how you delight me in speaking so! How you assure me, not
for yourself but for myself. So you will promise me, now you have my
love to urge you on, that you will no longer be afraid to speak to these
wicked men, so that you may not excite their anger against you?"

[Illustration: "_Touched with His Lips through the Grating_"
Original Etching by Mercier]

"Take courage! When they saw me sad and sorrowful, they accused me, no
doubt, of being a prey to my remorse; but when they see me proud and
joyous, they will believe their pernicious example has gained on me."

"That's true; they will no longer suspect you, and my mind will be easy.
So mind, no rashness, no imprudence, now you belong to me,--for I am
your little wife."

At this moment the turnkey awoke.

"Quick," said Rigolette, in a low voice, and with a smile full of grace
and modest tenderness, "quick, my dear husband, and give me a loving
kiss on my forehead through the grating; that will be our betrothing."
And the young girl, blushing, bowed her forehead against the iron
trellis.

Germain, deeply affected, touched with his lips through the grating her
pure and white forehead.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Oh, oh! What, three o'clock already?" said the turnkey; "and visitors
ought to leave at two! Come, my dear little girl," he added, addressing
the grisette, "it's a pity, but you must go."

"Oh, thanks, thanks, sir, for having allowed us thus to converse alone!
I have given Germain courage, and now he will look livelier, and need
not fear his wicked companions."

"Make yourself easy," said Germain, with a smile; "I shall in future be
the gayest in the prison."

"That's all right, and then they will no longer pay any attention to
you," said the guardian.

"Here is a cravat I have brought for Germain, sir," said Rigolette.
"Must I leave it at the entrance?"

"Why, perhaps you should; but still it is such a very small matter! So,
to make the day complete, give him your present yourself." And the
turnkey opened the door of the corridor.

"This good man is right, and the day will be complete," said Germain,
receiving the cravat from Rigolette's hands, which he pressed tenderly.

"Adieu; and to our speedy meeting! Now I am no longer afraid to ask you
to come and see me as soon as possible."

"Nor I to promise you. Good-bye, dear Germain!"

"Good-bye, my dear girl!"

"Wear the cravat, for fear you should catch cold; it is so damp!"

"What a pretty cravat! And when I reflect that you knitted it for me!
Oh, I will never let it leave me!" said Germain, pressing it to his
lips.

"Now, then, your spirits will revive, I hope! And so good-bye, once
more. Thank you, sir. And now I go away, much happier and more assured.
Good-bye, Germain!"

"Farewell, my dear little wife!"

"Adieu!"

A few minutes afterwards, Rigolette, having put on her goloshes and
taken her umbrella, left the prison more joyfully than she had entered
it. During the conversation of Germain and the grisette, other scenes
were passing in one of the prison yards, to which we will now conduct
the reader.




CHAPTER IX.

THE LIONS' DEN.


If the appearance of a house of confinement, constructed with every
attention to salubrity and humanity, has nothing repulsive in its
aspect, the sight of the prisoners causes a very different feeling. At
the sight of the criminals who fill the gaols, we are at first seized
with a shudder of fear and horror. It is only after some reflection that
this is overcome, and feelings of pity mixed with bitterness overcome
us.

To understand the feeling of horror and fear, our reader must follow us
to the Fosse aux Lions (the Lions' Den), one of the yards in La Force so
called. In this are usually placed the most dangerous criminals, whose
ferocity, or the charges against whom, are most serious. At this time
they had been compelled to place there, in consequence of the
alterations making in the prison, many other prisoners. These, although
equally under accusations and awaiting the assizes, were almost all
respectable persons in comparison with the usual occupants of the Lions'
Den. The sky, gloomy, gray, and rainy, cast a dull light over the scene
we are about to depict, and which took place in the centre of the yard
of considerable extent, square, and enclosed by high white walls, having
here and there several grated windows.

At one end of this yard was a narrow door with a wicket; at the other
end, at the entrance to the day-room, a large apartment with a stove in
the centre, surrounded by wooden benches, on which were sitting and
lying several prisoners conversing together. Others, preferring
exercise, were walking up and down the walks, four or five in a row, arm
in arm. It requires the pencil of Salvator or Goya, in order to sketch
the different specimens of physical and moral ugliness, to render in its
hideous fantasy the variety of costumes worn by these men, for the most
part covered with squalid rags,--for being only accused, _i. e._
supposed innocent, they were not clad in the usual uniform of the
central houses. Some, however, wore it; for on their entrance into gaol,
their rags appeared so filthy and infected that, after the usual washing
and bath, they had the frock and trousers of coarse gray cloth, as worn
by the criminals, assigned to them.

A phrenologist would have observed attentively those embrowned and
weather-beaten countenances, those flat or narrow foreheads, those cruel
or crafty looks, the wicked or stupid mouth, the enormous neck,--they
nearly all presented frightful resemblances to brutes. In the cunning
looks of one was seen the perfidious subtlety of the fox, in another was
the sanguinary rapacity of the bird of prey, in a third, the ferocity of
a tiger; and, in all, the animal stupidity of the brute. We will sketch
one or two of the most striking physiognomies in the Fosse aux Lions.

Whilst the turnkey was watching his charge, a sort of council was being
held in the day-room. Amongst the prisoners there assembled were
Barbillon and Nicholas Martial. The prisoner who appeared to preside and
lead in this debate was a scoundrel called the Skeleton, whose name has
been often mentioned by the Martial family in the Isle du Ravageur. The
Skeleton was _prévôt_, or captain, of the day-room. This fellow was tall
and about forty years of age, fully justifying his sinister nickname by
a meagreness impossible to describe, but which might almost be termed
osteologic.

If the countenance of the Skeleton presented more or less analogy with
that of the tiger, the vulture, or the fox, the shape of his forehead,
receding as it did, his bony, flat, and lengthened jaws, supported by a
neck of disproportioned length, instantly reminded you of the
conformation of a serpent. Complete baldness increased still more this
hideous resemblance, for beneath the corded skin of his forehead, nearly
as flat as a reptile's, might be distinguished the smallest
protuberances, the smallest sutures of his skull. His beardless face was
exactly like old parchment tightly distended over the bones of his face,
and only somewhat stretched from the projection of the cheek-bone to the
angle of the lower jaw, the working of which was distinctly visible. His
eyes, small and lowering, were so deeply imbedded, and the rim of his
brow so prominent, that under his yellow brow, when the light fell, were
seen two orbits literally filled with shadows; and, a little further on,
the eyes seemed to disappear in the depths of these two dark cavities,
these two black holes, which gave so sinister an aspect to the skeleton
head. His long teeth, whose alveolar projections were to be accurately
traced beneath the tanned skin of his bony and flat jaws, were almost
continually developed by a habitual sneer.

Although the stiffened muscles of this man were almost reduced to
tendons, he possessed extraordinary strength, and the strongest resisted
with difficulty the grasp of his long arms, his long and lean fingers.
He had the formidable clutch of a skeleton of iron. He wore a blue
smock-frock, very short, and which exposed (and he was vain of it) his
knotted hands and half his forearm, or rather two bones, the radius and
the ulna (this anatomy will be excused us), two bones enveloped in a
coarse and black skin, separated by a deep groove, in which were some
veins hard and dry as cords. When he placed his hands on a table he
seemed, as Pique-Vinaigre justly remarked, as if he were spreading out a
game of knuckle-bones.

The Skeleton, after having passed fifteen years of his life at the
galleys for an attempt at robbery and murder, had broken his ban and
been taken in the very act of theft and murder. The last assassination
had been committed with circumstances of such ferocity that the ruffian
made up his mind, and with reason, that he should be condemned to death.
The influence which the Skeleton exercised over the other prisoners,
from his strength, energy, and wickedness, had caused him to be chosen
by the director of the prison as _prévôt_ of the dormitory,--that is to
say, the Skeleton was charged with the police of the chamber as far as
concerned its order, arrangement, and the cleanliness of the room and
the beds, a duty which he discharged perfectly; and no prisoner dared to
fail in the cares and duties which he superintended. The Skeleton was
discoursing with several prisoners, amongst whom were Barbillon and
Nicholas Martial.

"Are you sure of what you say?" inquired the Skeleton of Martial.

"Yes, yes,--a hundred times, yes! Father Micou heard it from the
Gros-Boiteux, who has already tried to knock this hound on the head
because he peached about some one."

"Then let's do for him,--brush him up!" said Barbillon. The Skeleton was
already inclined to give that skulking Germain a turn of his hand.

The _prévôt_ took his pipe from his mouth for a moment, and then said,
in a tone so low and husky as to be scarcely audible:

"Germain kept aloof from us, gave himself airs, watched us,--for the
less one talks the more one listens. We meant to get rid of him out of
the Fosse aux Lions, and if we had given him a quiet squeeze, they'd
have taken him away."

"Well, then," inquired Nicholas, "what alteration need there be now?"

"This alteration," replied the Skeleton; "that if he has turned
informer, as the Gros-Boiteux declares, he mustn't get off with a quiet
squeeze."

"By no manner o' means!" said Barbillon.

"We must make an example of him," continued the Skeleton, warming as he
went on. "It is not now the nabs who look out for us, but the noses.
Jacques and Gauthier, who were guillotined the other day, were informed
against,--nosed; Rousillon, sent to the galleys for life,--nosed."

"And me, and my mother, and Calabash, and my brother at Toulon," cried
Nicholas; "have we not all been nosed by Bras-Rouge? To be sure we have;
because, instead of shutting him up here with us, he has been sent to La
Roquette. They daren't put him with us; he knew he had done us wrong,
the old--"

"Well," added Barbillon, "and didn't Bras-Rouge nose upon me, too?"

"And I, too," said a young prisoner, in a thin voice, and lisping
affectedly. "I was split upon by Jobert, who had proposed to me a little
affair in the Rue St. Martin."

The latter personage, with a fluty voice, pale, fat, and effeminate
face, and with a sly and treacherous glance, was singularly attired. He
wore as a head-dress a red pocket-handkerchief, which exposed two locks
of light brown hair close to his temples; the two ends of his
handkerchief formed a projecting rosette over his forehead; his cravat
was a merino shawl, with a large pattern, which crossed over his chest;
his mulberry-coloured waistcoat almost disappeared beneath the tight
waistband of a very large pair of trousers of plaid, with very large and
different-coloured checks.

"And was not that shameful? Such a man to turn against me!" he added, in
his shrill voice. "Yet, really, nothing in the world would have made me
distrust Jobert."

"I know very well that he sold you, Javatte," replied the Skeleton, who
seemed to protect the prisoner peculiarly; "and as a proof that they
have done for thy nose the same as they have done for Bras-Rouge, they
have not dared to leave Jobert here, but sent him to the stone jug of
the Conciergerie. Well, there must be an end put to this! There must be
an example; for traitors are doing the work of the police, and believe
themselves safe in their skins because they are put in a different
prison from those on whom they have nosed."

"That's true."

"To prevent this, every prisoner should consider every nose as his
deadly enemy. Whether he informs against Peter or James, here or there,
that's nothing; fall on him tooth and nail. When we have made cold meat
of four or five in the prisons, the others will think twice before they
turn 'snitch.'"

"You're right, Skeleton," said Nicholas; "and let Germain be number
one."

"And no mistake," replied the _prévôt_; "but let us wait until the
Gros-Boiteux arrives. When, for instance, he has proved to all the world
that Germain is a nose the thing shall be settled out of hand; the calf
shall bleat no more, we'll stop his wind."

"And what shall we do with the turnkeys who watch us?" inquired the
prisoner whom the Skeleton called Javatte.

"I have my plan, which Pique-Vinaigre will aid."

"He! He's a coward."

"And no stronger than a flea."

"I'm awake. Where is he?"

"He had come out of the visiting-room, but went back again to see his
lawyer."

"And is Germain still in the visiting-room?"

"Yes, with the little wench who comes to see him."

"When he returns be on your guard. But we must wait for Pique-Vinaigre,
without him we can do nothing."

"No?"

"No."

"And Germain shall be done for?"

"I'll take care of that."

"But with what? They have taken all our knives away."

"What do you think of these nippers, would you like to have your neck in
their clutch?" asked the Skeleton, opening his long bony fingers, hard
as iron.

"You'll choke him?"

"Decidedly."

"But if they find out that it is you?"

"Well, what if they do? Am I a calf with two heads, such as they show at
the fair?"

"No, that's true; a man has but one throat, and yours--"

"Is sentenced; my lawyer told me so yesterday. I was taken with my hand
in the bag, and my knife in the weasand of the stiff'un. I'm a 'return
horse,' too; so nothing can be more certain. I'll drop my head into
Charlot's (the headsman's) basket, and I shall see if it's true that he
does his customers, and puts sawdust into his basket instead of the bran
which government allows us."

"True, the guillotine has a right to its bran. Now, I remember my father
was robbed in the same way," said Nicholas Martial, with a ferocious
grin.

This horrid jest created immense laughter amongst the prisoners. This is
fearful, but far from exaggeration; we give but a faint idea of these
conversations, so common in prisons. The prisoners were all laughing
joyously.

"Thousand thunders!" cried the Skeleton. "I wish they who punish us
would come and see how we bear it. If they will come to the Barrière St.
Jacques the day of my benefit they will hear me address the audience in
a neat and appropriate speech, and say to Charlot, in a gentlemanly
tone, 'Père Sampson, the cord if you please.'"[1]

  [1] To understand this horrid jest the English reader must know
  that the doors in France are usually opened by the porter, who
  sits in his room and pulls a cord to allow the person going out
  to have free egress; and the blade of the guillotine glides
  down the grooves of the machine, after a spring has been set in
  motion, by touching a cord that acts upon it.

Fresh bursts of laughter hailed this jest.

"And then Charlot opens the baker's (the devil's) door," continued the
Skeleton, still smoking his pipe.

"Ah, bah! Is there a devil?"

"You fool, I was only joking. There's a sharp blade, and they put a head
under it, and that's all. And now that I know my road, and must stay at
the abbey of _Mont-à-Regret_ (guillotine), I would rather go there
to-day than to-morrow," said the Skeleton, with savage excitement. "I
wish I was there now,--my blood comes into my mouth when I think what a
crowd there'll be to see me; there'll be, at least, I should say, from
four to five thousand who will push and squeeze to get good places, and
they'll hire seats and windows, as if for a grand procession. I hear 'em
now crying, 'Seats to let! Seats to let!' And then there'll be troops of
soldiers, cavalry and infantry, and all for me,--for the Skeleton!
That's enough to rouse a man if he was as big a coward as
Pique-Vinaigre, that would make you walk like a hero. All eyes on you,
and that makes a fellow pluck up; then--'tis but a moment--a fellow dies
game, and that annoys the big-wigs and curs, and gives the knowing ones
pluck to face the chopper."

"That's true, on Gospel!" added Barbillon, trying to imitate the fearful
audacity of the Skeleton; "they think to make us funky when they set
Charlot to work to get his shop open at our expense."

"Ah, bah!" said Nicholas, in his turn; "we laugh at Charlot and his
shop; it is like the prison or the galleys,--we laugh at them, too; and
so, that we may be all friends together, let's be jolly as long as we
can."

"The thing that would do us," said the shrill-voiced prisoner, "would be
to put us in solitary cells day and night. They do say they mean to do
so at last."

"In solitary cells!" exclaimed the Skeleton, with repressed rage; "don't
talk of it! Solitary cell--alone! Hold your tongue! I would rather have
my arms and legs cut off! Alone within four walls! Quite alone--without
having our pals to laugh with! Oh, that will never be! I like the
galleys a hundred times better than the central prison, because at the
galleys, instead of being shut up, one is out-of-doors, sees the world,
people going and coming, and has his jokes and fun. Well, I'd rather be
done for at once than be put in a solitary cell, if only for a year.
Yes, for at this moment I am sure to be guillotined--ain't I? Well, if
they said to me, 'Would you rather have a year of solitary confinement?'
I should hold out my neck. A year all alone! Why, is it possible? What
do they suppose a man thinks of when he is alone?"

"Suppose you were carried there by main force?"

"Well, I wouldn't stay; I would make such use of my hands and feet that
I should escape," replied the Skeleton.

"But if you couldn't,--if you were unable to escape?"

"Then I'd kill the first person who came near me, in order to have my
head chopped off."

"But if, instead of sentencing such as us to death, they condemned us to
be in solitary confinement for life?"

The Skeleton appeared struck at this remark, and, after a moment's
silence, replied:

"Why, then, I'll tell you what I should do,--I should dash out my brains
against the walls. I would starve rather than be in a solitary cell.
What, all alone! all my life alone with myself,--and no chance of
escape! I tell you it is impossible. Well, you know, there's no man more
reckless than I am--I'd kill a man for a dollar, and for nothing if my
honour was concerned; they believe I have only killed two persons, but
if the dead could tell tales there are five tongues could say what I
have done."

The ruffian was boasting. The sanguinary declarations are still another
trait of the hardened criminals. A governor of a prison said to us, "If
the assassinations boasted of by these scoundrels were really committed,
the population would be decimated."

"And I, too," said Barbillon, desirous of bragging in his turn; "they
think I only silenced the husband of the milk-woman in the Cité, but I
did many others with tall Robert, who suffered last year."

"I was going to say," continued the Skeleton, "that I fear neither fire
nor devil. Well, if I were in a solitary cell, and certain I could not
escape,--thunder! I believe I should be frightened!"

"And so, if you had to begin your time over again as prig and throttler,
and if, instead of central houses, galleys, and guillotine, there were
only solitary cells, you would hesitate before such a chance?"

"_Ma foi!_ I believe I really should!" replied the Skeleton.

And he said truly. It is impossible to describe the vast terror which
such ruffians experience at the very idea of being in solitary
confinement. And is not this very terror an eloquent plea in favour of
this punishment?

       *       *       *       *       *

An uproarious noise made by the prisoners in the yard interrupted the
Skeleton's council. Nicholas rose hastily, and went to the door of the
room to discover the cause of this unusual tumult.

"It is the Gros-Boiteux," said Nicholas, returning.

"The Gros-Boiteux!" exclaimed the _prévôt_. "And has Germain come down
from the visiting-room?"

"Not yet," replied Barbillon.

"Then let him make haste," said the Skeleton, "and I'll give him an
order for a new coffin."

The Gros-Boiteux, whose arrival was so warmly hailed by the prisoners in
the lions' den, and whose information might be so fatal to Germain, was
a man of middle stature; but, in spite of being fat and crippled, he was
nimble and vigorous. His countenance, brutal like that of most of his
companions, was of the bulldog character; his low forehead, his small
yellow eyes, his flaccid cheeks, his heavy jaws, the lower being very
projecting, and armed with long teeth, or, rather, broken fangs, which
in places projected beyond his lips, made his resemblance to that animal
the more striking. He wore a felt cap, and over his clothes a blue cloak
with a fur collar.

The Gros-Boiteux was accompanied into the prison by a man about thirty
years of age, whose tanned and freckled face appeared less dissolute
than that of the other prisoners, although he affected to appear as
dogged as his companion. From time to time his features became overcast,
and he smiled bitterly. The Gros-Boiteux soon found himself amongst his
boon companions and acquaintances, and he could scarcely reply to the
congratulations and kind words which came to him from all sides.

"What, is it you, old boy? All right! Now we shall have some fun."

"You haven't hurried yourself."

"Still I have done all I could to see my friends again as soon as
possible, and it was no fault of mine if the stone jug didn't claim me
sooner."

"Don't doubt you, old boy! And a man doesn't pick out a gaol as his
favourite residence; but once trapped he does his best to be jolly."

"And so we shall be, for Pique-Vinaigre is here."

"Is he? What, one of the old customers of Melun? Why, that's capital!
For he'll help us to pass the time with his stories, and his customers
will not fail him, for there are more recruits coming in."

"Who are they?"

"Why, just now at the entrance, whilst I came in, I saw two fresh chaps
brought in; one I didn't know, but the other, who wore a blue cotton cap
and a gray blouse, I have seen before somewhere. He is a
powerful-looking man, and I think I have met him at the Ogress's of the
White Rabbit."

"I say, Gros-Boiteux, don't you remember at Melun I bet you a wager that
in less than a year you would be nabbed again?"

"To be sure I do, and you've won. But what are you here for?"

"Oh, I was caught on the prigging lay--_à la Americaine_."

"Ah, always in the same line."

"Yes, I continue in my usual small way. The rig is common, but there are
always 'culls'; and but for the stupidity of a pal I should not be here.
However, once caught twice warned; and when I begin again I will be more
careful,--I have my plan."

"Ah, here's Cardillac!" said the Boiteux, going to a little man
wretchedly dressed, with ill-looking aspect, full of craft and
malignity, and with features partaking of the wolf and fox. "Ah, old
chap, how are you?"

"Ah, old limper," replied the prisoner nicknamed Cardillac to the
Gros-Boiteux; "they said every day, 'He's coming--he's not coming!' But
you are like the pretty girls, you do as you like."

"Yes, to be sure."

"Well," replied Cardillac, "is it for something spicy that you are here
now?"

"Yes, my dear fellow, I had done one or two good things, but the last
was a failure; it was an out-and-out-go, and may still be done.
Unfortunately, Frank and I overshot the mark."

And the Gros-Boiteux pointed to his companion, towards whom all eyes now
turned.

"Ah, so it is--it's Frank!" said Cardillac; "I didn't know him again
because of his beard. What, Franky! Why, I thought you'd turned honest,
and was, at least, mayor of your village."

"I was an ass, and I've suffered for it," said Frank, quickly; "but
every sin has its repentance. I was good once, and now I'm a prig for
the rest of my days. Let 'em look out when I get out."

"What happened to you, Frank?"

"What happens to every free convict who is donkey enough to think he can
turn honest. Fate is just! When I left Melun I'd saved nine hundred and
odd francs."

"Yes, that's true," said the Gros-Boiteux, "all his misfortunes have
come from his keeping his savings, instead of spending 'em jolly when he
left the 'jug.' You see what repentance leads to!"

"They sent me, _en surveillance_, to Etampes," replied Frank; "being a
locksmith by trade, I went to a master in my line and said to him, 'I am
a freed convict, I know no one likes to employ such, but here are nine
hundred francs of my savings, give me work, my money will be your
guarantee, for I want to work and be honest.'"

"What a joke!"

"Well, you'll see how it answered. I offered my savings as a guarantee
to the master locksmith that he might give me work. 'I'm not a banker to
take money on interest,' says he to me, 'and I don't want any freed
convicts in my shop. I go to work in houses to open doors where keys are
lost, I have a confidential business, and if it were known that I
employed a freed convict amongst my workmen I should lose my customers.
Good day, my man.'"

"Wasn't that just what he deserved, Cardillac?"

"Exactly."

"You simpleton!" said the Gros-Boiteux to Frank, with a paternal air;
"instead of breaking your ban at once, and coming to Paris to melt your
mopusses, so that you might not have a sou left, but be compelled to
return to robbing. You see the end of your fine ideas."

"That's what you are always saying," said Frank, with impatience; "it is
true I was wrong not to spend my 'tin,' for I have not even enjoyed it.
Well, as there were only four locksmiths in Etampes, he whom I had first
addressed had soon told all the others, and they said to me as had said
their fellow tradesman, 'No, thank ye.' All sung the same song."

"Only see, now, what it all comes to! You must see that we are all
marked for life."

"Well, then, I was on the idle of Etampes, and my money melted and
melted," continued Frank, "but no work came. I left Etampes, in spite of
my surveillance, and came to Paris, where I found work immediately, for
my employer did not know who or what I was, and it's no boast to say I
am a first-rate workman. Well, I put my seven hundred francs which I had
remaining into an agent's hands, who gave me a note for it; when that
was due he did not pay me, so I took my note to a _huissier_, who
brought an action against him, and recovered the money, which I left in
his hands, saying to myself there's something for a rainy day. Well,
just then I met the Gros-Boiteux."

"True. Well, Frank was a locksmith and made keys, I had a job in which
he could be of service, and I proposed it to him. I had the prints, and
he had only to go to work, when, only imagine, he refused,--he meant to
turn honest. So, says I, I'll arrange about that, I'll make him work,
for his own interest. So I wrote a letter, without any signature, to his
master, and another to his fellow workmen, to inform them that Frank was
a liberated convict,--so the master turned him away. He went to another
employer and worked there for a week,--same game again; and if he had
gone to a dozen I'd have served him in the same way."

"And if I had suspected that it was you who had informed against me,"
answered Frank, "I'd have given you a pleasant quarter of an hour to
pass. Well, I was at length driven away from my last employer as a scamp
only fit to be hanged. Work, then,--be respectable,--so that people may
say, not 'What are you doing?' but 'What have you done?' Once on the
_pavé_ I said, 'Fortunately I have my savings to fall back upon.' So I
went to the _huissier_, but he had cut his stick, and spent my 'tin';
and here was I without a feather to fly with, not even enough to pay for
a week's lodging. What a precious rage I was in! Well, at this moment
comes the Gros-Boiteux, and he took advantage of my situation. I saw it
was useless trying to be honest, and that once on the prig there's no
leaving it. But, old Gros, I owe you a turn."

"Come, Frank, no malice!" replied the Gros-Boiteux. "Well, he did his
part like a man, and we entered upon the business, which promised
royally; but, unfortunately, at the moment when we opened our mouths to
swallow the dainty bit, the 'traps' were down upon us. Couldn't be
helped, you know, lad! If it wasn't for that, why, our profession would
be too good."

"Yet if that vagabond of a _huissier_ had not robbed me I should not
have been here," said Frank, with concentrated rage.

"Well, well," continued the Gros-Boiteux, "do you mean to say that you
were better off when you were breaking your back with work?"

"I was free," retorted Frank.

"Yes, on Sundays and when you were out of work, but the rest of the week
you were tied up like a dog, and never sure of employ. Why, you don't
know when you are well off."

"Will you teach me?" said Frank, bitterly.

"Well, you've a right to be vexed, for it was shameful to miss such a
good stroke; but it is still to be done in a month or two. The people
will become reassured, and it is a rich, very rich house. I shall be
sentenced for breaking my ban, and so cannot resume the job, but if I
find an amateur I will hand it over to him a bargain. My woman has the
prints, and there is nothing to do but make new keys, and with the
information I can give it must succeed. Why, there must be, at least,
400_l._ to lay hands on, and that ought to console you, Frank."

Frank shook his head, crossed his hands over his chest, and made no
reply.

Cardillac took the Gros-Boiteux by the arms, led him into a corner of
the yard, and said to him, after a moment's silence:

"Is the affair you have failed in still good?"

"In two months as good as new."

"Can you prove it?"

"Of course."

"And what do you ask for it?"

"A hundred francs as earnest; and I will give you the word arranged with
my woman, on which she will hand you the prints, from which you can make
the false keys. And, moreover, if the thing comes off, I shall expect a
fifth share of the swag to be handed over to my woman."

"That's not unreasonable."

"As I shall know to whom she has given the prints, if I am done out of
my share I shall know whom to inform against."

"And very right, too, if you were choused; but amongst prigs and
cracksmen there's honour,--we must rely on each other, or all business
would be impossible."

Another anomaly in this horrid existence. This villain spoke the truth.
It is very seldom that thieves fail in their faith in such arrangements
as these, but they usually act with a kind of good faith,--or, rather,
that we may not prostitute the word, we will say that necessity compels
these ruffians to keep their words; for if they failed, as the companion
of the Gros-Boiteux said, "All business would be impossible." A great
number of robberies are arranged, bought, and plotted in this way in
gaol,--another pernicious result of confinement in common.

"If what you say is sure," continued Cardillac, "I can agree for the
job. There are no proofs against me, I am sure to be acquitted, and in a
fortnight I shall be out; let us add three weeks in order to turn
oneself about, to get the false keys, and lay our plans, and then in six
weeks from this--"

"You'll go to the job in the very nick of time."

"Well, then, it's a bargain."

"But how about the earnest? I must have something down."

"Here is my last button, and when I have no more,--yet there are others
left," said Cardillac, tearing off a button covered with cloth from his
ragged blue coat, and then tearing off the covering with his nails, he
showed the Gros-Boiteux that, instead of a button-mould, it contained a
piece of forty francs. "You see I can pay deposit," he added, "when the
affair is arranged."

"That's the ticket, old fellow!" said the Gros-Boiteux. "And as you are
soon going out, and have got rhino to work with, I can put you up to
another thing,--a real good go,--the cheese,--a regular affair which my
woman and myself have been cooking up, and which only wants the
finishing stroke. Only imagine a lone street in a deserted quarter, a
ground floor, looking on one side into an obscure alley, and on the
other a garden, and here two old people, who go to roost with the cocks
and hens since the riots, and, for fear of being robbed, they have
concealed behind a panel, in a pot of preserves, a quantity of gold; my
woman found it out by gossiping with the servant. But I tell you this
will be a dearer job than t'other, for it is in hard cash, and all
cooked ready to eat and drink."

"We'll arrange it, be assured. But you haven't worked over well since
you left the central."

"Yes, I have had a pretty fair chance. I got together some trifles which
brought me nearly sixty pounds. One of my best bites was a pull at two
women who lodged in the same house with me in the Passage de la
Brasserie."

"What, at Daddy Micou's?"

"Yes."

"And your Josephine?"

"Just the same; a real ferret as ever. She cooks with the old couple I
have mentioned to you, and so smelt out the pot with the golden honey in
it."

"She's nothing but a trump!"

"I flatter myself she is. But, talking of trumps, you know the
Chouette?"

"Yes; Nicholas has told me the Schoolmaster did for her, and he has gone
mad."

"Perhaps from losing his sight through some accident. But I say, old
fellow, it's quite understood that you will buy my two bargains, and so
I shall not speak to any one else."

"Don't; and we will talk them over this evening."

"Well, and how are you getting on here?"

"Oh, we laugh and play the fool."

"Who's _prévôt_ of the chamber?"

"The Skeleton."

"He's not to be joked with. I have seen him at Martial's, in the Isle du
Ravageur. We had a flare-up with Josephine and La Boulotte."

"By the way, Nicholas is here."

"So Micou told me when he made a lament that Nicholas was putting the
screw on--an old hunks! Why, what else were receivers made for?"

"Here is the Skeleton," said Cardillac, as the _prévôt_ appeared at the
door of the room.

"Young 'un, come forward," said the Skeleton to the Gros-Boiteux.

"Here I am," he replied, going into the apartment, accompanied by Frank,
whose arm he held.

During the conversation between the Gros-Boiteux, Frank, and Cardillac,
Barbillon had been, by order of the _prévôt_, to select twelve or
fifteen of the choicest prisoners, who (in order to avoid the suspicions
of the turnkey) had come separately into the day-room. The other
_détenus_ had remained in the yard, and some of them, by Barbillon's
advice, had appeared to be disputing, in order to take off the attention
of the turnkey from the room in which were now assembled the Skeleton,
Barbillon, Nicholas, Frank, Cardillac, the Gros-Boiteux, and some
fifteen other prisoners, all awaiting with impatient curiosity until the
_prévôt_ should open the business.

Barbillon, charged with the look-out, placed himself near the door. The
Skeleton, taking his pipe from his mouth, said to the Gros-Boiteux:

"Do you know a slim young man named Germain, with blue eyes, brown hair,
and the look of a noodle?"

"What! Is Germain here?" inquired the Gros-Boiteux, with surprise, hate,
and anger in his looks.

"What, then, you know him?" said the Skeleton.

"Know him?" replied the Gros-Boiteux. "Why, my lads, I denounce him as a
nose, and he must be punished!"

"Yes, yes!" replied the prisoners.

"Are you sure it was he who informed against you?" asked Frank; "suppose
it was a mistake,--we mustn't ill-use a man who's innocent."

This remark was displeasing to the Skeleton, who leaned over to the
Gros-Boiteux, and said in his ear:

"Who is this man?"

"One with whom I have worked."

"Are you sure?"

"Yes--but he hasn't gull enough--too much treacle in him."

"Good, I'll keep an eye on him."

"Tell us how Germain turned nose," said a prisoner.

"Yes, let us know all about it, Gros-Boiteux," continued the Skeleton,
who did not take his eyes off Frank.

"Well, then," said Gros-Boiteux, "a man of Nantes, named Velu, a freed
convict, brought up the young fellow, whose birth no one is acquainted
with. When he had reached the proper age they put him into a
banking-house at Nantes, thinking they had put a wolf to watch the
money-box, and make use of Germain to do a bold and great stroke which
had been meditated for a very long time. There were to be two _coups_, a
forgery and a dip into the strong chest at the bank, something like a
hundred and fifty thousand francs. All was arranged, and Velu relied on
the young fellow as on himself, for the chap slept in the room in which
the iron safe was. Velu told him his plans; Germain neither says yes or
no, but reveals all to his employer, and the very same evening cuts his
stick and mizzles to Paris."

The prisoners burst into various murmurs of indignation and threats.

"He's a spy--nose--informer!--and we'll have the bones out of his body!"

"If it's agreeable, I'll seek a quarrel with him, and settle his hash!"

"Silence in the stone jug!" exclaimed the Skeleton, in a tone of
command.

The prisoners were silent.

"Go on," said the _prévôt_ to Gros-Boiteux, and he went on smoking.

"Believing that Germain had consented, and relying on his assistance,
Velu and two of his friends attempted the job that same night. The
banker was on the watch; one of Velu's friends was taken as he was
entering a window, he himself escaping with difficulty. He reached Paris
enraged at having been sold by Germain, and foiled in a splendid affair.
One fine day he met the young fellow; it was in the open daylight, and
he didn't dare do anything, but he followed him, found out where he
lived, and one night we two, Velu and little Ledru, fell on Germain.
Unfortunately he escaped, and then changed his residence in the Rue du
Temple, where he lived; we were unable to find him afterwards. But if he
is here, I demand--"

"You have nothing to demand," said the Skeleton, in a tone of authority.

The Gros-Boiteux was instantly silent.

"I take the bargain off your hands; you will concede to me Germain's
skin, and I'll flay him alive. I am not called the Skeleton for nothing.
I am dead-alive, my grave is dug, and I run no risk in working for the
stone jug. The informers destroy us faster than the police; they put
noses of La Force into La Roquette, and the noses of La Roquette in the
Conciergerie, and they think themselves safe. Now, mind you, when each
prison shall have killed its informer, no matter when he may have
informed, that will take away the others' appetite. I will set the
example, and let others follow it."

All the prisoners, admiring the Skeleton's resolution, closed around
him. Barbillon himself, instead of remaining near the door, joined the
group, and did not perceive another prisoner, who had entered the room.
This individual, clothed in a gray blouse, and wearing a blue cotton cap
with a red worsted border, pulled down over his eyes, started as he
heard the name of Germain mentioned, and then, mingling with the
Skeleton's admirers, gave out loud tones of approbation at the deadly
determination of the _prévôt_.

"What an out-and-outer the Skeleton is!" said one.

"The devil himself is a fool to him!"

"This here's what I call a man!"

"If all were like him, wouldn't the flats be afeard?"

"He'll do a real service to the stone jug, and when they see this, the
noses will look blue."

"And no mistake!"

"And since the Skeleton is safe to suffer, why, it'll cost him nothing
to put a nose out of joint!"

"Well, I think it's too bad," said Frank, "to kill the young chap."

"Why? Why?" exclaimed the Skeleton, in a savage tone; "no one has a
right to protect a traitor."

"Yes, to be sure, he is a traitor,--so much the worse for him," said
Frank, after a moment's reflection.

These latter words, and Gros-Boiteux's assurance, put the doubts which
the other prisoners had entertained against Frank to rest.

The Skeleton alone continued to mistrust him.

"And what are we to do with the turnkey? Tell us, Dead-Alive, for that
is your name as well as the Skeleton," said Nicholas, with a grin.

"We must draw off his attention somehow."

"No; we'll hold him down by main force."

"Yes!"

"No!"

"Silence in the stone jug!" said the Skeleton.

There was complete silence.

"Listen to me!" said the _prévôt_, in his hoarse voice. "There is no
means of doing the thing so long as the turnkey remains in the day-room
or the walking-yard. I have no knife, and there must be a few groans,
for the sneak will struggle."

"Well, what then?"

"Why, this. Pique-Vinaigre has promised to tell us to-day after dinner
his story of 'Gringalet and Cut-in-Half.' It rains, and we shall all
come here, and the sneak will come and sit down there in the corner, as
he always does. We'll give Pique-Vinaigre some sous that he may begin
his tale. It will be dinner-time in the gaol; the turnkey will see us
quietly employed in listening to the miraculous mystery of 'Gringalet
and Cut-in-Half,' and will, suspecting no harm, make off to the tap. As
soon as he has left the yard we shall have a quarter of an hour to
ourselves, and the nose will be cold meat before the turnkey can return.
I will undertake it,--I who have done for stouter fellows in my day; and
mind, I'll have no assistance!"

"Mind your eye!" cried Cardillac; "and what about the _huissier_ who
will always come for a gossip amongst us at dinner-time? If he comes
into the room to listen to Pique-Vinaigre, and sees Germain done for, he
will cry out for help. He's not one of us, the _huissier_,--he's in a
private cell, and we should mistrust him."

"Is there a _huissier_ here?" said Frank, the victim as we know of a
breach of trust, by Maître Boulard. "Is there a _huissier_ here?" he
repeated, with astonishment, "and what is his name?"

"Boulard," replied Cardillac.

"The very man! The identical villain!" cried Frank, clenching his fists.
"It is he who has stolen my savings!"

"The _huissier_?" inquired the _prévôt_.

"Yes, seven hundred francs of mine."

"You know him? And has he seen you?" inquired the Skeleton.

"I have seen him, worse luck! But for him I should not be here."

These regrets sounded ill in the Skeleton's ears, and he fixed his
malignant eyes steadfastly on Frank, who replied to several of his
comrade's questions. Then stooping towards the Gros-Boiteux, he said, in
a low voice:

"This is a fresh 'un who might tell the turnkey."

"No, I'll answer for his not informing against any one; yet still he has
his scruples about going the whole hog, and he might aid Germain in
defending himself. It would be best to get him out of the yard."

"I'll do it," said the Skeleton; and then aloud he said, "I say, Frank,
won't you pitch into this thief of a lawyer?"

"Won't I, that's all!"

"Well, he's coming, and so look out."

"I'm ready, and he shall bear my marks!"

"We shall have a row, and they will send the _huissier_ to his room and
Frank to the black-hole," said the Skeleton, in an undertone, to the
Gros-Boiteux; "we shall thus get rid of both."

"What a lucky pitch! Why, this Skeleton is a prime minister!" said the
Boiteux, admiringly; and then he added, in a loud tone, "I say, shall we
tell Pique-Vinaigre that we shall avail ourselves of his history to come
over the turnkey and throttle the sneak?"

"By no means; Pique-Vinaigre is too soft and too cowardly. If he was up
to the thing he wouldn't tell the story, but when the job is done and
over he'll bear his share."

The dinner-bell sounded at this moment.

"To your puddings, dogs!" said the Skeleton; "Pique-Vinaigre and Germain
will soon be in the yard. Now mind your eyes, my boys! They call me
Dead-Alive, but the sneak is also dead-alive!"




CHAPTER X.

THE STORY-TELLER.


The new prisoner of whom we have spoken, and who was dressed in a gray
blouse, with a cotton cap on his head, had attentively listened to and
energetically applauded the scheme for punishing the reserve of Germain,
even at the expense of his life. This individual, whose form betokened
strength and power of no ordinary description, quitted the day-room with
the rest of the prisoners without being noticed, and soon mingled with
the different groups assembled in the courtyard to receive their
rations, crowding around the persons employed in the distribution like
so many hungry cormorants.

Each prisoner received a piece of the meat employed in making the day's
soup, with about half a loaf of tolerably good bread. Such of the
_détenus_ as possessed the means were allowed to purchase drink at the
wineshop belonging to the prison, and even to go thither to regale
themselves with their lush; while persons who, like Nicholas, had
received provisions from their friends, generally made a sort of feast,
to which they invited their most intimate acquaintances. The guests
selected by the son of the executed felon upon the present occasion were
the Skeleton, Barbillon, and, at the suggestion of the latter,
Pique-Vinaigre, in order that good eating and drinking might quicken his
talent for "storytelling."

The ham, hard boiled eggs, cheese, and delicate white bread, wrung from
the forced generosity of Micou the receiver, were arranged most
temptingly on a bench in the day-room, and the Skeleton prepared himself
to do ample justice to the repast, without in the slightest degree
disturbing his appetite by the thoughts of the cold-blooded murder that
was to follow it.

"Just go and see whether Pique-Vinaigre is coming, will you, my fine
fellow?" cried he, addressing an individual who stood near him. "I tell
you what it is, while I'm waiting to choke that stuck-up young fool they
call Germain, I'm blowed if hunger and thirst won't choke me, if I have
to dawdle about much longer. And here; don't forget to work old Frank up
to do for the bum-bailiff, so that we may kill two birds with one stone,
as the saying is."

"Don't you be afraid, old Dead-Alive! If Frank don't make a stiff'un of
the bailey, it won't be our fault, that you may take your oath of!" And,
while uttering these words, Nicholas went forth from the day-room.

At this moment Maître Boulard entered the yard, smoking a cigar, his
hands buried in the pockets of his gray duffle dressing-gown, his peaked
cap pulled down well over his ears, and a look of chuckling satisfaction
upon his fat, full-blown countenance. He quickly espied Nicholas, who
was busily occupied gazing around in search of Frank. That person was at
that precise period of time busily occupied, in company with his friend
Gros-Boiteux, in eating his dinner, and, from the position in which they
sat on one of the benches, they perceived not the presence of the
bailiff. Acting in implicit obedience to the directions given him by the
Skeleton, directly Nicholas, from the corner of his eye, descried the
approach of Maître Boulard, he feigned entire ignorance of his vicinity,
but made for the place where Frank and his companions were seated.

"How are you, my ticket?" inquired the bailiff of Nicholas.

"Bless me!" answered he; "I declare I didn't see you. I suppose you're
like me, come out to take a sniff of fresh air and have your daily
walk?"

"Why, that's about it. But I happen to have more reasons than one
to-day; and I tell you how it is. But, first of all, catch hold of one
of these cigars; they're deuced good ones. Come, don't be so missy and
shy about it; take as many as you like. Hang it all, when men are shut
up together in a place like this, they oughtn't to be stingy."

"You are very good, and so are your cigars. But you were saying you had
several reasons for walking out to-day?"

"Well, and so I have. First and foremost, I don't feel as hungry as
usual; so, thinks I, I'll go and look on while those chaps eat their
dinner. Who knows but the sight of their jaws all working away together
may screw me up a bit, and give me a relish against feeding-time?"

"A famous idea!" said Nicholas. "But if you really do want to see a
couple of feeders, just draw this way. There!" added he, pointing to the
bench on which Frank was sitting; "what do you think of a pair of
grubbers like those? I should say we were better behind than before
them, or they might even swallow us instead of those huge lumps of bread
and cheese and onions so rapidly stowed away in their capacious jaws."

"Let's have a look at them!" said Maître Boulard.

"Well, to be sure!" cried Nicholas, with feigned surprise; "I declare
one of them is Gros-Boiteux!"

Gros-Boiteux and Frank both turned around at these words. Stupefied and
speechless, the bailiff continued to gaze in utter amazement at the man
he had so wronged, while, starting up with a sudden spring, Frank threw
down the morsel he had been eating, and darting on Maître Boulard, he
seized him by the throat, exclaiming, "My money--my money; give me my
money!"

"Hallo! Who are you? What do you mean? Hands off, or you'll strangle me!
I--"

"My money, I say!"

"My good man, only calm yourself and listen to reason!"

"No, not till you give me back my money. What, aren't you satisfied with
having brought me here? Can you not restore me what you stole from me?"

"But I--I--I--never--"

"I tell you again, if I get sent to the galleys 'tis all along of you;
for had you not taken my little all from me, I should not have been
driven to the necessity of robbing others; I might have lived and died
an honest man. You may be acquitted, you may escape the punishment you
deserve, but, at least, you shall carry my marks away with you. Ha, ha!
You can come it grand, and swagger about here dressed up with your gold
chains and trinkets, bought, no doubt, with the money of other poor
devils who have been cheated by you as I have been. Take that for your
pains--and that--that--and that! Now, have you had enough? No! Then
here's for you again!"

"Help, help!" screamed the bailiff, as he rolled on the ground at
Frank's feet, while his infuriated antagonist continued to belabour him
with all his force.

The rest of the prisoners took little or no interest in this affray, but
contented themselves with forming a circle around the two combatants, or
rather the assailant and the assailed; for Maître Boulard, frightened
and out of breath, made not the slightest resistance, but contented
himself with warding off his adversary's blows as well as he could.
Fortunately, the repeated cries of the poor maltreated bailiff reached
the ears of one of the superintending officers, by whose intervention he
was rescued from the rough hands of Frank. Pale, terrified, and almost
speechless with terror, Maître Boulard arose. One eye was wholly closed
by the severe beating he had received, and without giving himself time
to pick up his cap, he wildly cried, as he rushed towards the officer:

"Open the door! Let me out--let me out! I can't and I won't stay here
another minute. Help, here! Help, help!"

"As for you," exclaimed the officer, grasping Frank by the collar, "do
you come along with me before the governor. I know you'll catch it, too,
for fighting; two days in the black-hole is the very least you'll get, I
promise you."

"I've paid him off, at any rate," returned Frank; "and I don't care for
the rest."

"I say," whispered Gros-Boiteux, while affecting to be merely helping to
arrange his dress, "I say, you won't breathe a word of what's going to
happen to the sneak, of course?"

"Oh, don't be afraid; 'tis just likely, had I been by, I might have
stood up in his defence, because to kill a man in that manner
is--hard--at least--and for such a trifle! But as for telling of it, or
betraying you all--oh, no!"

"Now, then," called out the officer, "I say, are you coming or are you
not?"

"That's all right!" said Nicholas. "We've got well rid of Frank and the
bailiff, now let's go to work without further loss of time upon the
sneak!"

As Frank was being led from the prison yard, Germain and Pique-Vinaigre
entered it. It was scarcely possible to recognise Germain, for his
hitherto melancholy and dejected countenance was radiant with joy and
exulting happiness. He walked proudly erect, casting around him a look
of certain and assured content; he knew himself to be beloved, and with
that consciousness all the horrors of his prison seemed to disappear.
Pique-Vinaigre followed him with a timid, confused air, and, after much
hesitation, at length plucked up sufficient courage to venture to
address Germain, whose arm he gently touched, ere the intended victim
had reached the group of prisoners, who, from a distance, were examining
him with looks of deadly hatred. Spite of himself, Germain shuddered at
thus being brought into contact with a person of Pique-Vinaigre's
appearance, whose wretched person and ragged attire were ill-calculated
to impress any one with a favourable opinion of him; but recollecting
the earnest advice of Rigolette, and feeling altogether too happy
himself to act with any want of benevolence, Germain stopped, and said
to Pique-Vinaigre, in a gentle tone of voice:

"What do you want with me, my friend?"

"I want to thank you."

"For what?"

"For the kindness shown to my sister by the pretty young woman who
visited you to-day."

"I really do not understand you," said Germain, much surprised.

"Well, then, I'll try and make you. Just now, when I was in the lodge of
the prison, I saw the man who was on duty in the visitors' room a little
while ago."

"Ah, yes, a very good-hearted sort of man, too. I recollect him well."

"It is not often you can apply that term to the gaolers of a prison, but
the man I mean (Rousel is his name) is really deserving of being styled
a kind, good-hearted man. So, all of a sudden, he whispers in my ear, 'I
say, Pique-Vinaigre, my lad,' he says, 'do you know M. Germain?' 'Yes,'
says I, 'I do,' says I; 'he's the _bête noire_ of the prison yard.'"
Then suddenly interrupting himself, Pique-Vinaigre said to Germain, "I
beg your pardon for calling you a _bête noire_. Don't, think anything of
that, but listen to the end of my story."

"Oh, I'm listening; go on."

"'Yes,' says I, 'I know who you mean very well,' says I. 'You mean M.
Germain, the _bête noire_ of the prison yard.' 'And of you, too, I
suppose?' said the officer, in a severe and serious manner. 'Oh, bless
you,' says I, 'I am too good-natured, as well as too much of a coward,
to venture to call any one disagreeable; and less M. Germain than any
one else,' says I, 'for I don't see any harm in him, and other folks
appear to me very cruel and unjust towards him.' 'That's all right,
then,' answers the officer; 'and I can tell you that you are bound to
side with M. Germain, for he has been very kind to you,' he says. 'To
me?' says I; 'how do you mean?' 'Well,' he answers, 'I don't mean M.
Germain exactly, and it ain't to you altogether he's been kind; but
still, for all that,' says Rousel, 'you are bound to show him your
gratitude.'"

"Try," said Germain, smilingly, "and make me understand what it is you
do mean."

"That's precisely what I said to the officer. 'Speak more clearly,' I
says. So then he makes answer, 'Why, it was not M. Germain, but the very
pretty young person that was here just now to see him, who loaded your
sister with all sorts of kindnesses. She overheard the poor thing
telling you all her troubles; and directly as the creature went out, the
charming young woman as come visiting to M. Germain went and offered to
serve her in every way she could.'"

"Dear, good Rigolette!" murmured Germain, deeply affected by this little
incident; "she said not one word to me of all this."

"'Well, to be sure!' I says to the officer; 'what a poor stupid goose I
am!' 'You are quite right--you are!' M. Germain--leastways, his
friend--has been good to me,--that is to say to my sister Jeanne, which
is the same thing, only much more than if the favour had been done to
myself."

"Poor, dear Rigolette!" said Germain; "ever the same tender,
compassionate, generous-hearted creature!"

"So then the officer goes on to say how he heard all that passed between
your nice young woman and my poor sister Jeanne. 'And now,' he says,
'Pique-Vinaigre, that you are aware of the fact, if you don't try to
show kindness by every means in your power to M. Germain, and more
especially, if you should know of any plot got up against him and not
warn him of it, why,' he says, 'Pique-Vinaigre, you would be a regular
scamp and a blackguard.' 'I tell you what,' I makes answer and says,
'I'm an unfinished scamp as yet, but I'm no blackguard, and, what's
more, I never will be worse than I am, for the sake of my poor dear
Jeanne and her children; and so because M. Germain's friend has taken
notice of my Jeanne, who is one of the best and worthiest creatures that
ever lived,--I may venture to boast of my sister, though I am ashamed of
myself, but for that reason I will do all in my power to save or serve
M. Germain; unfortunately, I can do but little, after all!' 'Never mind!
Do your best; that is all I ask of you. But I will give you the pleasure
of being the pleasing bearer of news to M. Germain, which, indeed, I
have only just learned myself.'"

"What is it?" inquired Germain.

"That to-morrow morning there will be a vacant chamber you can have for
paying for, then you will be all to yourself. The officer desired me to
tell you so."

"Indeed!" exclaimed Germain; "how truly glad I am to hear it! That
worthy man was right in saying you would be the bearer of pleasant
news."

"Well, I do think so myself; for it is quite easy to perceive that you
do not feel comfortable among such poor wretches as we are." Then
suddenly breaking off, Pique-Vinaigre hastily added, in a low whisper,
while feigning to stoop, as though searching for something he had
dropped, "Hark ye, M. Germain, the prisoners are all looking at us,
wondering what we are talking about. I must go. But be on your guard;
and if any one tries to quarrel with you, don't make any answer; they
want a pretext for all attacking you at once. Barbillon is the one
chosen to provoke you, so take especial care of him. I will try and turn
the attention of the others from being directed towards you in a
spiteful manner." And, with these words, Pique-Vinaigre rose up from his
stooping position, with the air of one who had found the object of his
search.

"Thanks, my good fellow!" said Germain, eagerly, as he separated from
his companion; "rely on my prudence!"

Only that morning aware of the plot against Germain, which, as far as he
knew, consisted merely in an intention of involving him in some affray
which should compel the governor of the prison to remove him to some
other yard in the building, Pique-Vinaigre was not only ignorant of the
murderous designs so recently projected by the Skeleton, but equally so
that the conspirators intended to avail themselves of his recital of
"Gringalet and Cut-in-Half" to deceive the vigilance of the officer on
duty, as well as to beguile his attention from what was going on.

"Come on, old Make-believe!" said Nicholas to Pique-Vinaigre, as he
advanced to meet him. "Throw away that lump of dog's-meat you have got
in your hand; we have got a regular feast among us, and you are invited
to it!"

"A feast? La, how nice! What, out of the Panier Fleuri, or the Petit
Ramponneau?--tell us which it is! But they are both such nice places,
there isn't a pin to choose."

"Oh, you fool! Our feast is prepared in the day-room; all laid out so
temptingly on a bench. There you'll see ham and eggs, and cheese,
and--It's my treat, mind!"

"Well, I'm one of the right sort to walk into it. But it seems a pity to
throw away this good ration I have just received! I only wish my poor
sister and her children could have the benefit of it. Ah, poor things!
It's not often they see meat, unless, indeed, when they find a few
scraps thrown out before the butcher's door."

"Oh, bother about your sister and her brats! Let's go in, or Barbillon
and the Skeleton will leave nothing but empty trenchers for us!"

Nicholas and Pique-Vinaigre entered together into the day-room, where
they found the Skeleton sitting astride on the bench on which the
savoury viands were displayed, swearing and grumbling at the absence of
the founder of the feast.

"Oh, there you are, you creeping animal!" exclaimed the ruffian, as he
caught sight of the story-teller. "What the deuce hindered you from
bringing your blessed carcass here a little sooner?"

"He was spinning a yarn with Germain when I found him," answered
Nicholas, helping himself to a large slice of the ham.

"Ho, ho!" cried the Skeleton, gazing earnestly on Pique-Vinaigre,
without, however, diminishing the ardour with which he devoured the
provisions; "so you were gossiping with Germain, were you?"

"Yes, I was," returned Pique-Vinaigre. "But what a fool that Germain is!
I used to think that he was a sort of spy in the yard; but, Lord love
you, he is too much of a simpleton for that!"

"Oh, you think so, do you?" said the Skeleton, exchanging a rapid and
significant glance with Nicholas and Barbillon.

"I'm as sure of it as I am that I see a capital ham before me. Besides,
how the devil can he be a spy when he is always by himself? He speaks to
no one, and nobody ever changes a word with him; and you all know that
he runs from us as if we carried the plague in our pockets. Now, how a
man can tell many tales who acts as he does, is more than I can
conceive. However, spy or not, he will not be able to do us much more
harm, as to-morrow he will obtain a room for himself."

"The deuce he will!" replied the Skeleton. Then taking advantage of a
conversation which had commenced between Barbillon and Pique-Vinaigre,
he leaned towards Nicholas, and said, whisperingly, "You see, we have
not an instant to lose. After four o'clock to-day all chance of serving
him out is over; it is now nearly three. You see, unfortunately, he does
not sleep in my dormitory, or I would settle him in the night; and
to-morrow he will be out of our reach."

"Well, I don't care!" answered Nicholas, as though replying to some
observation of his companions; "I say--and I'll stick to it--Germain
always seems to look down upon us as though we were not as good as he."

"No, no!" interposed Pique-Vinaigre; "you are quite wrong as regards
this young man--you are, indeed. You frighten him--you do; and I know
that he considers himself not fit to hold a candle to you. Why, if you
only knew what he was saying to me just now--"

"Let's hear what it was!"

"'Why,' says he, 'you are a lucky fellow, Pique-Vinaigre, you are,' he
says, 'to take the liberty of speaking to the celebrated Skeleton (that
was the very word he used), just for all the world as if you were his
equal! But whenever I meet him,' he says, 'I feel myself overcome with
so much awe and respect that, though I would give my eyes out of my head
to know him and converse with him, I no more dare do it than I should
make bold to accost the _préfet de police_ if he were in his chair of
office, and me beholding him body and bones.'"

"He said that, did he?" returned the Skeleton, feigning to believe the
well-meant fiction of Pique-Vinaigre, as well as to feel gratified by
the deep admiration he was reported to have excited in the breast of
Germain.

"As true as that you are the cleverest ruffian upon earth, he said those
very words; and, more than that, he--"

"Oh, then, if that is the case," said the Skeleton, "I shall make it up
with him. Barbillon wanted to pick a quarrel with him, but I shall
advise him to be quiet."

"That's right!" exclaimed Pique-Vinaigre, fully persuaded that he had
effectually diverted from Germain the danger that threatened him; "that
would be much the best way! For this poor chicken-hearted fellow would
never quarrel,--simply because, like me, he has not pluck enough to
fight; therefore it is no use getting into a dispute."

"Still," cried the Skeleton, "I am sorry, too, that we shall not have
our fun; we had quite reckoned upon getting up a fight with Germain to
amuse us after dinner. I don't know now what we shall do to kill the
time."

"Ah, to be sure!" chimed in Nicholas. "What the deuce shall we do with
ourselves? Can anybody tell me?"

"Well, then, I'll settle it!" said Barbillon. "Since you seem to
recommend my leaving Germain alone, I'll agree to do so, on condition
that Pique-Vinaigre tells us one of his best stories."

"Done!" exclaimed the story-teller. "But I must make one condition as
well as you, and, without both are agreed to, I don't open my lips."

"Well, then, say what your other condition is. I dare say it is not more
difficult than the former, and we soon agreed about that."

"It is that this honourable company, which is overstocked with riches,"
said the Pique-Vinaigre, resuming his old tone when addressing his
audiences preparatory to commencing his juggling tricks, "will have the
trifling kindness to club together and present me with the small sum of
twenty sous,--a mere trifle, gents, when you are about to listen to the
celebrated Pique-Vinaigre, who has had the honour of appearing before
the most celebrated prigs of the day--he who is now expected at Brest or
Toulon, by the special command of his majesty's government."

"Well, then, we'll stand the twenty sous after you have finished your
story."

"After?--no--before!" said Pique-Vinaigre.

"What! Do you suppose us capable of doing you out of twenty sous?" asked
the Skeleton, with an air of disdain.

"By no means!" replied Pique-Vinaigre. "I honour the stone jug with my
confidence, and it is in order to economise its purse that I ask for
twenty sous in advance."

"On your word and honour?"

"Yes, gentlemen; for, after my story, you will be so satisfied, that it
is not twenty sous but twenty francs--a hundred francs--you will force
me to take! I know that I should be shabby enough to accept them; and
thus, you see, it is from consideration, and you will do wisely to give
me twenty sous in advance."

"You don't want for the gift of the gab!"

"I have nothing but my tongue, and I must make use of that. And
then,--if it must be told,--my sister and her children are in terrible
distress, and, in a small house, even twenty sous is a consideration."

"Then why doesn't your sister prig, and her kids, too, if they're old
enough?" asked Nicholas.

"Don't ask me; it distresses--dishonours me! I am too kind--"

"What do you mean, you fool? Why, you encourage her!"

"True; I encourage her in the vice of being honest, and that is the only
line in which she shines. But come, it is agreed that I shall tell you
my famous story of 'Gringalet and Cut-in-Half.' But you must hand out
twenty sous, and Barbillon shall not pick a quarrel with this simpleton
of a Germain!"

"Well, you shall have twenty sous, and Barbillon shall not pick a
quarrel with that simpleton of a Germain," said the Skeleton.

"Then open your ears, and you will hear what you will hear! But it is
raining, which will make the customers tumble in, and there will be no
occasion to go out and seek them."

And the rain began to fall, and the prisoners, quitting the yard, took
refuge in the day-room, the turnkey being still in attendance.

We have said that this room was large and long, with a pavement, and
lighted by three windows, which looked out into the yard. In the centre
was the stove, near which were the Skeleton, Barbillon, Nicholas, and
Pique-Vinaigre. At a signal from the _prévôt_, the Gros-Boiteux joined
this group. Germain was one of the last to enter, absorbed in most
delightful thoughts, and he went mechanically to seat himself on the
ledge at the lowest window in the apartment, a place he usually
occupied, and which no one disputed with him, for it was at a distance
from the stove around which the prisoners were assembled.

We have already said that some fifteen of the prisoners had been
informed in the first instance of the treachery attributed to Germain,
and the murder which was to avenge it. But, soon whispered to one
another, the plan comprised as many adherents as there were prisoners;
these ruffians, in their blind cruelty, considering this fearful plot as
legitimate revenge, and viewing therein a certain guarantee against the
future disclosure of spies. Germain, Pique-Vinaigre, and the turnkey
were alone ignorant of what was about to take place. General attention
was divided between the executioner, the victim, and the story-teller,
who was about innocently to deprive Germain of the only succour he could
hope for; for it is nearly sure that the turnkey, when he saw the
prisoners attentive to the story of Pique-Vinaigre, would think his
surveillance useless, and take advantage of that moment of tranquillity
to go and take his meal. And when the prisoners had entered, the
Skeleton said to the turnkey:

"Old fellow, Pique-Vinaigre has a capital idea; he is going to tell us
his story of 'Gringalet and Cut-in-Half.' It is weather in which one
would not put a policeman out-of-doors, and we shall quietly wait in
till it is time to go to roost."

"Why, you are always pretty quiet when he begins his talk, and have no
need for me to be at your heels."

"Yes," said the Skeleton; "but Pique-Vinaigre asks a high price,--he
wants twenty sous for his story."

"Yes, the trifle of twenty sous,--a mere nothing!" cried Pique-Vinaigre.
"Yes, gents, nothing; for who that had a liard would not bestow it to
hear the adventures of poor little Gringalet, Cut-in-Half, and the
wicked Gargousse? It will rend your hearts, and make your hair stand on
end! And, gents, who is there that would not dispose of the paltry sum
of four liards--or, if you prefer counting my mites, of five
centimes--to have their hearts rent and their hair standing on end?"

"There are two sous," said the Skeleton, throwing down the piece of
money before Pique-Vinaigre. "Come, is the stone-jug too niggardly to
enjoy this pastime?" he added, looking at his accomplices with a
significant air.

Several sous fell around him, to the great joy of Pique-Vinaigre, who
thought of his sister as he collected the money.

"Eight--nine--ten--eleven--twelve--thirteen!" he said, as he picked up
the money. "Now, my rich friends, my capitalists, and others of the
cash interest, try once more. You cannot stop at thirteen, for it is an
unlucky number! Only seven sous deficient, the trifle of seven sous!
What, gents, shall it be said that the Fosse aux Lions could not produce
seven sous--seven miserable sous? Oh, gents, gents, you would make me
believe that you have been brought here very unjustly or that you have
all had a sad run of ill luck."

The shrill voice and broad jests of Pique-Vinaigre had brought Germain
from his reverie, and, as much to follow Rigolette's advice and make
himself popular with the prisoners as to give a trifle to the poor devil
who had testified some desire to be of service to him, he rose and threw
a piece of ten sous at the tale-teller's feet, who exclaimed, as he
pointed at his generous benefactor:

"Ten sous, gents! You see, I was speaking of capitalists! Honour to that
gentleman! He behaves like one of the monied interest, as an ambassador
to be agreeable to the company! Yes, gents; for it is to him that you
will owe the greater portion of 'Gringalet and Cut-in-Half,' and you
will thank him for it. As to the three sous over, why, I shall earn them
by imitating the voices of the personages, instead of speaking like you
and me. That will be another obligation you will owe to this wealthy
capitalist, whom you ought to adore."

"Come, no more blarney, but begin!" said the Skeleton.

"One moment, gents!" said Pique-Vinaigre. "It is but right that the
capitalist who has given me ten sous should be the best situated, except
our _prévôt_, who has first choice."

This proposal squared so well with the Skeleton's project that he
exclaimed:

"True; after me he ought to be best placed!" And again he looked
significantly at the prisoners.

"Yes, yes; let him come nearer," said the prisoners.

"Let him sit on the front bench."

"You see, young man, your liberality is recompensed; the honourable
company sees that you have a right to the front seat," said
Pique-Vinaigre to Germain.

Believing that his liberality had really better disposed his hateful
companions in his favour, and delighted thus to follow up Rigolette's
earnest desires, Germain, in spite of considerable repugnance, left the
place of his choice, and went towards the story-teller, who, having
arranged four or five benches around the stove, by the aid of Nicholas
and Barbillon, said, with emphasis:

"Here are the dress-boxes. All respect to the worthy--the capitalist
first."

"Now, then, let those who have paid take their seats," added
Pique-Vinaigre, gaily, firmly believing that, thanks to himself, Germain
had nothing now to fear. "And those who have not paid," he added, "will
sit down or stand up, which they please."

Let us sum up the arrangement of his scene. Pique-Vinaigre was standing
up near the stove ready to commence; near him was the Skeleton, also
standing up, and with his eyes intently fixed on Germain, ready to rush
upon him the moment the turnkey left the cell. At some distance from
Germain, Nicholas, Barbillon, Cardillac, and other prisoners, amongst
whom was the man with the blue cotton nightcap and gray blouse,
occupying the remoter benches. The majority of prisoners, grouped here
and there, some sitting on the ground, others standing and leaning
against the wall, composed the secondary figures of this picture,
lighted, à la Rembrandt, by three lateral windows, which threw strong
light and deep shadows on forms so variously characterised and so
strongly marked. The turnkey, whose departure was to be, unknown to
himself, the signal for Germain's murder, kept close to the door, which
was ajar.

"Are we all ready?" asked Pique-Vinaigre of the Skeleton.

"Silence in the stone-jug!" said the latter, turning half around; and
then addressing Pique-Vinaigre, "Now, begin; we are all attention!"




CHAPTER XI.

GRINGALET AND CUT-IN-HALF.


Pique-Vinaigre began his recital thus, in the midst of the profound
silence of his auditory:

"It is no inconsiderable time ago that the story occurred which I am
about to relate to this honourable company. What was called La Petite
Pologne was not then destroyed. The honourable society knows (or does
not know) what was called La Petite Pologne?"

"Well enough!" said the prisoner in the blue cap; "they were some small
houses near the Rue du Rocher and the Rue de la Pépinière?"

"Exactly so, my dear sir," replied Pique-Vinaigre; "and the Quartier of
the Cité, which, at the same time, does not consist of palaces, would be
in comparison to La Petite Pologne the Rue de la Paix or the Rue de
Rivoli. What a rookery! but, at the same time, very convenient for gents
in our line. There were no streets but narrow alleys, no houses but
ruins, no pavement but a small carpet of mud and dungheaps, which would
have destroyed all the noise of wheels,--that is, supposing any
carriages passed by that way; but none did! From morn till night, and,
particularly, from night till morn, there were only heard cries of
'Watch! Watch! Help! Murder!' but the watch took no notice. The more
persons were knocked on the head in La Petite Pologne, the fewer persons
there were to apprehend. You should have seen the respectable
inhabitants who lived there! There were very few jewellers, goldsmiths,
and bankers; but then, on the other hand, there were quantities of
organ-grinders, puppet-showmen, punches, and showers of remarkable
animals. Amongst the latter was one well known as Cut-in-Half,--he was
so cruel, and especially to children. He acquired this name because it
was reported that he had cut a small Savoyard in two with a blow of his
hatchet."

At this moment the prison clock struck a quarter past three o'clock. The
prisoners being made to return to their cells at four o'clock, the
Skeleton's murderous design must be carried into execution before that
hour.

"_Mille tonnerres!_ The turnkey won't go!" he said, in a low tone, to
Gros-Boiteux.

"Be easy! He'll go when once the story is begun."

Pique-Vinaigre continued: "No one knew where Cut-in-Half came from. Some
said he was an Italian, others a Bohemian, others a Turk, others an
African; the gossips called him a magician, although a magician in our
times would be something to look at. What made them believe this was,
that he always had with him a large red monkey called Gargousse, and who
was so cunning and savage that he seemed as if possessed by the devil. I
shall mention this beauty again presently; as to Cut-in-Half, I shall
soon describe him. His complexion was like the old tops of a pair of
jockey-boots, his hair as red as the hair of his monkey, his eyes green,
and (what made the women think he was a conjuror) he had a black
tongue."

"A black tongue!" exclaimed Barbillon.

"Black as ink!" replied Pique-Vinaigre.

"And how did that happen?"

"Because, no doubt, when his mother was in the family way she had,
perhaps, talked of a negro," said Pique-Vinaigre, with modest assurance.
"To these attractions Cut-in-Half joined the profession of having a
multitude of tortoises, monkeys, guinea-pigs, white mice, foxes, and
marmosettes, corresponding to an equivalent total of Savoyards and
forsaken children. Every morning he distributed his animal to each, and
a morsel of black bread, and then despatched them to beg for 'Only one
ha'penny!' or dance the Catarina. Those who only brought in at night
fifteen sous were beaten, soundly beaten, so that their shrieks might be
heard from one end of La Petite Pologne to the other. I should also say
that there was in La Petite Pologne a man called Le Doyen (the Dean),
because he was the 'oldest inhabitant,' and, as it were, mayor, provost,
magistrate, for it was in his room (he kept a Tom and Jerry shop) that
all went when they could not otherwise decide their quarrels. Although
rather aged, yet Le Doyen was as strong as Hercules, and very generally
feared. They swore by him in La Petite Pologne; and when he said 'Very
good!' all the world said 'Very good!' When he said 'That's bad!' all
the world said 'That's bad!' He was a good fellow at bottom, but very
fierce, particularly when the strong misused the weak,--then look out
for squalls! As he was Cut-in-Half's nearest neighbour, he had heard the
children cry very frequently from the blows which the shower of beasts
gave them. He had said to him, 'If I hear the children cry, I will make
you cry in your turn; and, as you have the stronger voice, I will give
you the severer beating.'"

"Well done, Le Doyen! I like Le Doyen!" said the prisoner in the blue
nightcap.

"So do I!" added the turnkey, as he approached the group.

The Skeleton could not repress a movement of angry impatience.

Pique-Vinaigre proceeded:

"Thanks to Le Doyen, who had threatened Cut-in-Half, the cries of the
children were heard no more in the night-time in La Petite Pologne; but
the poor, unhappy little fellows did not suffer the less, for if they
cried no longer when their master beat them, it was because they were
afraid of being more cruelly beaten. As to complaining to Le Doyen, they
had no idea of that. For the fifteen sous which each little fellow was
obliged to bring in, Cut-in-Half lodged, boarded, and clothed them. In
the evening a bit of black bread, as at breakfast,--this was their food.
He never gave them clothes,--that was the way he clothed them; and he
shut them up at night with their animals, on the same straw in a garret,
to which they mounted by a ladder and a trap,--this was the lodging.
When once all had ascended, and the tale of children and animals was
complete, he took away the ladder and locked the trap.

"You may judge of the life and row which these monkeys, guinea-pigs,
foxes, mice, tortoises, marmosettes, and children made all in the dark
in this cock-loft, which was as big as a barn. Cut-in-Half slept in a
room underneath, with his great ape, Gargousse, fastened to the foot of
his bed. When the brute growled, because there was too much noise in the
loft, the beast-shower went up the ladder without any light, and, going
into the loft, laid about him right and left with a heavy whip, without
seeing or counting his blows. As there were always some fifteen
children, and some of the poor dears brought him in twenty sous a day,
Cut-in-Half having defrayed all his outlay, which was by no means
excessive, had left for himself some four or five francs a day, with
which he enjoyed himself, for it must be told that he was one of the
greatest tipplers that ever lived, and was regularly blind drunk once a
day. That was his rule; and he declared that, but for that, he should
have the headache every day. We should add, that out of his gains he
used to buy some sheeps' hearts for Gargousse, who ate raw flesh like a
cannibal. But I see the honourable society are anxious to be introduced
to Gringalet! Here he is, gents!"

"Let's have Gringalet, and I'll go and eat my soup," said the turnkey.

The Skeleton exchanged a look of savage satisfaction with the
Gros-Boiteux.

"Amongst the children to whom Cut-in-Half distributed his animals,"
continued Pique-Vinaigre, "was a poor little devil named Gringalet.
Without father or mother, brother or sister, without fire, food, or
shelter, he was alone in the world,--quite alone in a world which he had
not asked to enter, and which he might leave without attracting any
one's attention. He was not called Gringalet for any pleasure he had in
the name, for he was meagre, lean, and pallid; he did not look above
seven or eight years old, but was really thirteen. If he did not seem
more than half his name, it was not because of his own will, but because
he only fed perhaps every other day, and then so scantily, so poorly,
that it was really an exertion to make him pass for seven years old."

"Poor little brat! I think I see him!" said the prisoner in the blue
cotton nightcap; "there are so many children like him on the streets of
Paris dying of hunger!"

"They must begin to learn that way of living very young in order to get
accustomed to it," said Pique-Vinaigre, with a bitter smile.

"Come, get on!" said the Skeleton, suddenly; "the turnkey is getting
impatient--his soup is getting cold."

"Oh, never mind that!" said the _surveillant_. "I wish to know something
more of Gringalet; it is very amusing!"

"Yes, it is really very interesting!" added Germain, who was very
attentive to the story.

"Ah, thank ye for saying that, my capitalist," said Pique-Vinaigre;
"that gives me more satisfaction than your ten-sous' piece."

"_Tonnerre!_" exclaimed the Skeleton, "will you have done with your
delays?"

"Well, then," replied Pique-Vinaigre, "one day Cut-in-Half had picked up
Gringalet in the streets, dying with cold and hunger; perhaps it would
have been best if he had let him die. As Gringalet was weak, he was a
coward; as he was a coward, he became the jest and sport of the other
lads, who beat him and used him so ill that he would have become wicked
if he had not been deficient in strength and courage. But no; when he
had been heartily thumped, he cried, and said, 'I have not done any harm
to anybody, and everybody is unkind to me,--that's very cruel; oh, if I
were strong and bold!' You will, perhaps, imagine that Gringalet was
about to add, 'I would return to others the ill they do to me?' By no
means. He said,' Oh, if I were strong and bold, I would defend the weak
against the strong, for I am weak, and the strong have made me suffer!'
In the meanwhile, as he was too small a boy to prevent the strong from
ill-using the weak, beginning with himself, he prevented the larger
brutes from eating the smaller ones."

"What a strange idea!" said the prisoner in the blue cap.

"And, what is stranger still," said the tale-teller, "it was this idea
that consoled Gringalet for being beaten; which proves that his heart
was not bad at bottom."

"_Pardieu!_ Quite the contrary," said the guardian. "What an amusing
devil that Pique-Vinaigre is!"

At this instant the chimes went half past three o'clock. The Skeleton
and Gros-Boiteux exchanged significant glances. The time was drawing on,
and the _surveillant_ did not go; and some of the less hardened
prisoners seemed almost to forget the sinister projects of the Skeleton
against Germain, as they listened attentively to Pique-Vinaigre's
recital.

"When I say," he continued, "that Gringalet prevented the larger brutes
from eating the smaller, you must understand that Gringalet did not mix
himself up with tigers, and lions, and wolves, or even foxes and
monkeys, in the menagerie of Cut-in-Half,--he was too much of a coward
for that; but if he saw, for instance, a spider hidden in his web, in
wait for a poor foolish fly flying gaily in the sunshine of the good
God, without hurting any one, why, in a moment, Gringalet smashed the
web, freed the fly, and did for the spider like a regular Cæsar,--a real
Cæsar; for he turned as white as a sheet in touching such nasty
reptiles; and then it required resolution in him, who was afraid of a
cockchafer, and had been a long while in forming an intimacy with the
tortoise which Cut-in-Half handed to him every morning. Thus Gringalet,
overcoming the fear which the spider caused him, in order to prevent
flies from being eaten, proved himself--"

"As plucky in his way as a man who attacks a wolf to take a lamb from
his jaws," said the prisoner in the blue cap.

"Or a man who would have attacked Cut-in-Half to take Gringalet from his
clutches," added Barbillon, who was deeply interested.

"As you say," continued Pique-Vinaigre; "so that after one of these
onslaughts Gringalet did not feel himself so unhappy. He who never
laughed, smiled, looked about him, cocked his cap on one side (when he
had one), and hummed the 'Marseillaise' with the air of a conqueror. At
this moment, there was not a spider that dared to look him in the face.
Another time it was a grasshopper which was swimming and struggling in a
brook; in a moment, Gringalet put his two fingers boldly in the water
and rescued the grasshopper, which he put on the grass. A first-class
swimmer, who had fished up his tenth drowning man at fifty francs a
head, could not have been prouder than Gringalet when he saw his
grasshopper bend his legs and jump away. And yet the grasshopper gave
him neither money nor medal, nor uttered any more thanks than did the
fly. But then, Pique-Vinaigre, worthy friend, the honourable company
will say to me, what the devil pleasure could Gringalet, whom all the
world thumped and buffeted, find in freeing grasshoppers and destroying
spiders? Since people were unkind to him, why did he not take his
revenge by doing all the evil in his power? For instance, in giving
spiders flies to eat, leaving grasshoppers to drown, or even drowning
them on purpose?"

"Yes, why not? Why did he not revenge himself in that way?" asked
Nicholas.

"What good would that have been?" inquired another.

"Why, to do ill, as ill was done to him."

"No! Well, then, I understand he liked to save the flies, poor little
chap!" said the man in a blue cap. "He said, perhaps, 'Who knows if some
day they mayn't save me in the same way?'"

"My right worthy friend is right," cried Pique-Vinaigre, "and has read
in his heart what I was about to narrate to the honourable assembly.
Gringalet was not wicked; he did not see beyond the end of his nose; but
he said,'Cut-in-Half is my spider, and perhaps some day some one will do
for me what I do for the other poor little flies,--break his web and
take me from his clutches;' for till then nothing could have induced him
to run away from his master; he would as soon have thought of killing
himself. However, one day, when neither he nor his tortoise had had a
chance, and had not gained between either of them more than three sous,
Cut-in-Half beat the poor child very severely, so severely that, _ma
foi!_ Gringalet could not stand it any longer; and, tired of being the
butt and martyr of everybody, he watched a moment when the trap was
open, and, whilst Cut-in-Half was feeding his animals, he slid down the
ladder."

"Oh, so much the better," said a prisoner.

"But why didn't he go and complain to the Doyen?" inquired the blue cap;
"he would have served Cut-in-Half out."

"Yes, but he dared not; he was too much afraid, and preferred trying to
escape. Unfortunately, Cut-in-Half had seen him, and, seizing him by the
wrist, lugged him up again into the loft. Poor Gringalet, thinking of
what must befall him, shuddered all over, although he was by no means at
the end of his troubles. Apropos of Gringalet's troubles, I must now
mention to you Gargousse, the large and favourite ape of Cut-in-Half.
This mischievous brute was, _ma foi!_ taller than Gringalet; only
imagine what a size for a monkey! I must tell you why he was never taken
into the streets to be shown, like the other animals of the menagerie:
it was because Gargousse was so wicked and powerful that there was not
one amongst all the show-boys, except an Auvergnat of fourteen, a
determined chap, who, after many skirmishes and contests with Gargousse,
had mastered him, and could lead him about with a chain; and even with
him Gargousse frequently got up some fights, which ended in bloodshed
produced by Gargousse's bites. Enraged at this, the little Auvergnat
said, one fine day, 'Very well, I will revenge myself on this infernal
monkey;' and so, one morning, having gone out with the brute as usual,
he, in order to appease its savageness, bought a sheep's heart. Whilst
Gargousse was eating it, he put a rope through the end of his chain,
tied it to a tree, and, when he had got the brute quite at his mercy, he
gave it an outrageous walloping."

"Well done! Bravo the Auvergnat! Go it, my lad! Skin the beast alive!"
said the prisoners.

"He did whack him gloriously!" continued Pique-Vinaigre. "And you should
have seen how Gargousse cried, ground his teeth, leaped, danced, and
skipped hither and thither; but the Auvergnat used his stick famously!
Unfortunately, monkeys, like cats, are very tenacious of life. Gargousse
was as crafty as he was vicious; and when he saw, as they say, how the
wood was on fire, at a heavy blow he made a final bound, and fell flat
at the foot of a tree, shook for a moment, and then shammed dead, lying
as motionless as a log. The Auvergnat believed he had done for him, and,
thinking the ape dead, he cut away, resolved never again to return to
Cut-in-Half. But the beast Gargousse watched him out of the corner of
his eye, and, bruised and wounded as he was, as soon as he saw himself
alone he rent the cord asunder with his teeth. The Boulevard Monceaux,
where he had had this hiding, was close to La Petite Pologne, and the
monkey knew his way as easy as his paternoster; and, making off in that
direction, arrived at his master's, who roared and foamed when he saw
how his monkey had been served. This is not all. From this moment
Gargousse entertained such a furious revenge against all children that
Cut-in-Half, who was not the tenderest soul alive, dared not trust him
to any one for fear of an accident; for Gargousse was capable of
strangling or devouring a child, and all the little brute-showers,
knowing that, would rather be thrashed by Cut-in-Half than go near the
monkey."

"I must really go and eat my soup," said the turnkey, turning towards
the door; "this devil of a Pique-Vinaigre would wheedle a bird down from
a tree to hear him! I can't tell where the deuce he fishes up all he
tells!"

"Now, then, the turnkey will go," said the Skeleton, in a whisper to the
Gros-Boiteux. "I'm in such a rage I shake all over! Mind and form a wall
all around the informer,--I will take care of the rest!"

"Mind, now, and be good boys!" said the turnkey, turning towards the
door.

"As good as images!" replied the Skeleton, coming closer to Germain,
whilst the Gros-Boiteux and Nicholas, after having agreed on a signal,
made two steps in the same direction.

"Ah, worthy turnkey, you are going at the most interesting moment!" said
Pique-Vinaigre, with an air of reproach.

Had it not been for the Gros-Boiteux, who anticipated his intention, and
seized him suddenly by the arm, the Skeleton would have rushed on
Pique-Vinaigre.

"What! The most interesting moment?" replied the turnkey, turning
towards the story-teller.

"Decidedly," said Pique-Vinaigre; "you do not know all you will
lose,--the most delightful portion of the history is now about to
commence."

"Don't attend to him," exclaimed the Skeleton, who with difficulty
repressed his rage; "he is not in good trim to-day; for my part I think
his story very stupid."

"My story very stupid?" cried Pique-Vinaigre, wounded in his pride as a
tale-teller. "Well, turnkey, I beg of you,--I entreat you to remain till
the conclusion, which, at most, will not be longer than a quarter of an
hour, and as by this time your soup must be cold, why, you haven't much
to lose by a little delay. I will go ahead with my narrative, so that
you may still have time to eat your soup before we are locked up for the
night."

"Well, then, I'll stay, but make haste," said the turnkey, coming closer
towards him.

"You are wise to stay, turnkey," continued Pique-Vinaigre; "without
bragging, you never heard anything like it before, especially the
finale, which is the triumph of the ape, and Gringalet escorted in
procession by all the little beast-showers and inhabitants of La Petite
Pologne. On my word and honour, it is not for the sake of boasting, but
it is really superb."

"Then tell it speedily, my boy," said the turnkey, returning towards the
stove.

The Skeleton shook with rage. He almost despaired of accomplishing his
crime. If bedtime arrived, Germain must escape, for he was not in the
same dormitory with his implacable enemy, and on the following day
Germain was to be in a separate cell.

"So it's very stupid!" continued Pique-Vinaigre. "Well, the honourable
company shall be the judge of that. There could not exist a more
vicious brute than the big ape Gargousse, who was even more savage with
children than his master. What does Cut-in-Half do to punish Gringalet
for trying to run away? You shall know by and by. Well, in the meantime,
he seizes on the unhappy child, and locks him into the cock-loft for the
night, saying, 'To-morrow morning, when all your companions are gone
out, I will let you see what I do with vagabonds who try to run away
from me.' You may imagine what a wretched night Gringalet passed. He did
not close an eye, but kept asking himself what Cut-in-Half meant to do
with him, and then he fell asleep. He had a dream,--such a horrid
dream,--that is, the beginning of it was, as you shall see. He dreamed
that he was one of the very poor flies that he had so often rescued from
the spiders' webs, and that he had fallen into a large and strong web,
where he was struggling,--struggling with all his might, without being
able to escape. He then saw coming towards him, stealthily and
treacherously, a kind of monster, which looked like Cut-in-Half turned
into a spider. Poor Gringalet began to struggle again, as you may
suppose, but the more he struggled the more he got entangled, like the
poor flies. At last the spider came up to him, touched him, and he felt
the cold and hairy paws of the horrid beast curl around him and enclose
him, intending to devour him. He believed he was dead, when suddenly he
heard a kind of clear, ringing, sharp sort of buzzing, and he saw a
beautiful golden fly, with a kind of brilliant dart, like a diamond
needle, which flew around the spider with a furious air, and a voice
(when I say a voice you must imagine a fly's voice) which said, 'Poor
little fly! You have saved flies! The spider shall not--' Unfortunately
Gringalet jumped up at this moment, and did not see the end of his
dream; but yet he was at first somewhat assured, and said to himself,
'Perhaps the golden fly with the diamond dart would have killed the
spider if I had finished the dream.' But in vain did Gringalet
endeavour to make himself easy and take comfort; in proportion as the
night ended, his fears renewed, so strongly, that at last he forgot his
dream, or, rather, he only remembered the portion which affrighted him,
the large web in which he had been caught and enfolded by the spider
which resembled Cut-in-Half. You may imagine what a fright he was in;
only think--only think--alone,--quite alone, and no one to defend him!
In the morning, when he saw daybreak gradually appear through the
skylight of the cock-loft, his fears redoubled, and the moment was at
hand when he would be alone with Cut-in-Half. He then threw himself on
his knees in the middle of the garret, and, weeping bitterly, entreated
his comrades to ask Cut-in-Half to forgive him, or else to help him to
escape if possible. But some from fear of their master, others from
disregard, and some from ill nature, refused what poor Gringalet
requested so earnestly."

"Young scamps!" said the prisoner in the blue cap; "he is to be pitied,
so helpless. If he could have defended himself, tooth and nail, it would
have been very different, _ma foi!_ If you have fangs, show 'em, boy,
and defend your tail!"

"To be sure!" said several prisoners.

"Holloa, there!" exclaimed the Skeleton, unable to conceal his rage, and
addressing the Blue Cap; "won't you hold your jaw? Didn't I say silence
in the stone-jug? Am I captain of the ward or not?"

The Blue Cap's answer was to look the Skeleton full in the face, and
then make that low-lived gesture of the blackguards, which consists in
applying the thumb of the right hand to the end of the nose, opening the
fingers like a fan, and putting the little finger on the thumb of the
left hand, similarly extended. He accompanied this mute reply with so
odd a look that many of the prisoners laughed heartily, whilst others,
on the contrary, were actually stupefied at the audacity of the new
prisoner, so greatly was the Skeleton feared. The latter shook his fist
at the new prisoner, and said to him, grinding his teeth:

"We'll settle this to-morrow!"

"I'll make the calculation on your nob! I'll put down seventeen and
carry nothing!"

For fear the turnkey should have fresh motive for staying, in order to
repress any row, the Skeleton quietly replied:

"That is not what I mean; I am the captain of this room, and ought to be
attended to,--ought not I, turnkey?"

"Certainly," replied the superintendent; "no interruption; and go on,
Pique-Vinaigre, and make haste, will you, my lad?"

"Then," resumed Pique-Vinaigre, "Gringalet, seeing how all the world
forsook him, resigned himself to his miserable fate. It was broad day,
and all the boys were going out with their animals. Cut-in-Half opened
the trap, and called each to give him his morsel of bread. They all
descended the ladder, and Gringalet, more dead than alive, squeezed up
in a corner of the cock-loft with his tortoise, did not move, but
watched his companions as they descended one after the other, and would
have given everything he had to have done as they did. At length the
last quitted the loft, and then his heart beat quick as he thought his
master might forget him. But Cut-in-Half, who was standing at the foot
of the ladder, exclaimed in a loud voice, 'Gringalet! Gringalet!' 'Here
I am, master.' 'Come down directly, or I'll fetch you!' added
Cut-in-Half; and Gringalet believed his last hour was come. 'Oh,' said
he to himself as he trembled in all his limbs, and recollected his
dream, 'you are in the web, little fly, the spider is going to eat you!'
After having put his tortoise quietly down on the ground, he said
farewell to it, for he had become fond of the creature, and went to the
trap, and put his leg on the ladder to go down, when Cut-in-Half, taking
hold of his miserable little leg, as thin as a stick, pulled him down so
suddenly that Gringalet lost his hold, and fell with his face all down
the rounds of the ladder."

"What a pity it was that the Doyen of La Petite Pologne was not there at
that moment! What a dance he could have played to Cut-in-Half!" said the
blue nightcap; "it is at such moments as these that a man is always
happy and contented to feel how useful it is sometimes to be strong."

"That's all right, my lad, but, unfortunately, the Doyen was not there,
so Cut-in-Half seized hold of the child by the waistband of his little
breeches, and carried him to his own hole of a chamber, where the huge
monkey was kept fastened to the foot of his bed. Directly the spiteful
beast saw the boy, he began to jump and spring about, grinding his teeth
like a mad thing, and darting towards Gringalet as near as his chain
permitted him, as though he meant to devour him."

"Poor Gringalet! How ever will he be able to escape? If that beast of a
monkey once gets hold of him he is safe to strangle him! I declare,"
exclaimed the man in the blue cap, "the very thoughts of a poor innocent
child being in such a dangerous situation makes me shiver from head to
foot, and I seem as though I couldn't hurt a worm. How do you feel, good
friends?"

"The very same!" replied a burst of voices. "No more could we!"

At this moment the prison clock chimed forth the first quarter past
three, and the Skeleton, becoming momentarily more and more apprehensive
that the time would slip away without their being able to accomplish
their design, and furious at the continued interruptions, as well as
irritated at the evident sympathy and compassion awakened in the
breasts of the prisoners by Pique-Vinaigre's recital, called out in
angry voice:

"Silence in the stone jug, I say! We shall never get to the end of this
unlucky history if you persist in chiming in."

The buzz of voices died away at these words, and Pique-Vinaigre thus
continued:

"When it is recollected how much poor little Gringalet had had to endure
before he could get used to his tortoise, and that even the boldest of
his companions trembled and turned pale even at the mention of
Gargousse's name, it may very easily be imagined what deadly terror he
experienced when he found himself placed by his master within the reach
of the horrible monkey. 'Oh, master, master!' he cried, as his teeth
rattled and shook in his head, as though he were under the influence of
an ague fit, 'pray--pray forgive me! Pray have mercy on me! I will never
do so any more. Indeed, indeed, I never will! Oh, I promise you, master;
only let me off this time, and I will never do so again!' But all these
prayers and supplications escaped almost unconsciously from the poor
child, who had indeed committed no fault that called for such promises.
Cut-in-Half, however, laughed at the boy's terrors, and, spite of the
struggles and resistance of the unhappy child, he dragged him within the
grasp of Gargousse, who sprang upon him, and seized him with a savage
grasp."

A cry of execration passed throughout the assembly, which had been
listening with the profoundest attention to the progress of the tale.

"I should have been a rare fool had I gone away," said the officer on
duty, as he drew nearer to the listening groups.

"Oh, but," said Pique-Vinaigre, "you've heard nothing as yet,--the best
is still to come. Directly poor Gringalet felt the cold hairy paws of
the ape seize him by the head and neck, he imagined it was with the
intention of devouring him, and driven almost mad by his agony, he began
shrieking and groaning in a manner that would have moved a stone to pity
him, while he wildly exclaimed, 'Oh, send help! Send help from heaven,
God of goodness and of little children! Oh, little golden fly, come and
preserve me! Come, little fly, and save me from the horrible spider I
dreamed about!' 'Will you hold your noise?' exclaimed Cut-in-Half, as he
gave him several hard kicks, for he was fearful lest his cries should be
heard; but in a minute's time there was no further danger of that, for
the poor boy neither cried or struggled further, but pale and cold as
marble, he remained kneeling, while the devilish monkey clawed and
scratched and buffeted the trembling victim, who, closing his eyes,
resigned himself to his fate. After Gargousse had tired himself with
thus tormenting poor Gringalet, he suddenly paused, and looked up to his
master's countenance, as though asking what he should do next. And
really it seemed as though the ape and his master understood each
other's thoughts, for Gargousse immediately renewed the attack by
plucking out handfuls of the shuddering boy's hair, upon which
Cut-in-Half burst into fits of laughter, so long and so loud that, had
poor Gringalet tried ever so hard, he could not have made himself heard
amid these wicked and malicious rejoicings. They had, however, the
effect of encouraging Gargousse, who proceeded to attack the unfortunate
child with redoubled fierceness."

"Ah, you beggar of a monkey!" exclaimed Blue Bonnet, "I only wish I had
been near enough to catch hold of your tail! I'd have swung you round
and round like a windmill, and finished by knocking out your dirty
brains against the hardest stone I could find! That beastly ape was as
cruel as if he had been a man!"

"Oh!" cried a simultaneous burst of voices, "no man ever was, or ever
will be, so cruel as that, I'm sure!"

"Hallo!" interrupted Pique-Vinaigre, "you forget Cut-in-Half when you
make that remark. However, just listen to what he did next. He
unfastened the long chain of Gargousse from the leg of his bed, around
which it was generally secured, and tied it to the waist of the poor
trembling child, who by this time was more dead than alive; so that the
monkey and the boy were thus placed at the opposite ends of the chain."

"There was a devil's own invention! Ay, ay, it is quite certain that
some human creatures are more cruel than the most savage wild beast!"

"When Cut-in-Half had completed this arrangement, he said to the monkey,
who appeared to understand every word he said,--and certainly these were
such a precious pair it would have been a thousand pities they should
have had any difficulty in the matter: 'Now, then, Gargousse, attention!
You have been exhibited with all your clever tricks, but it is now your
turn to be showman. You shall be master, and Gringalet shall be
monkey,--yes, your monkey. So up with you, Gringalet, or I shall set
Gargousse on you, and let him tear you to pieces!' The unhappy child,
unable to utter a word, had again fallen on his knees, holding up his
clasped hands in mute supplication, while the only sound he could utter
proceeded from the convulsive rattling of his teeth. 'Make him stand
upright, Gargousse!' said Cut-in-Half to his ape, 'and if he is
obstinate do as I am doing;' and with these words he belaboured the
child with a switch he held in his hand. Then passing the stick to the
monkey, he added, 'Make him stand up! Hit harder!--harder!' You all know
what close imitators all monkeys are, but Gargousse was ever remarkable
for his extreme quickness in copying the actions of others. He was not
long, therefore, in bestowing so severe a flagellation on the shoulders
of his terrified victim as soon compelled him to try at least to stand
upon his feet, and once up, the unhappy child became as nearly as
possible the same height as the ape. Then Cut-in-Half went out of the
room, and descended the staircase, calling out to Gargousse to follow
him, which he did, tugging violently at the end of the chain to which
Gringalet was fastened, and compelling him to follow like a slave, at
the same time beating him as hard as he could with his cane; and thus
they reached the small courtyard belonging to the miserable tenement
occupied by Cut-in-Half and his live stock.

"Now, then, Cut-in-Half reckoned on having good sport, so, first
securing the door that opened into the lane, he made signs to Gargousse
to play Gringalet round and round the yard as fast as he could. The ape
loved the fun as well as his master, and coursed the frightened boy
round the yard, beating him with all the strength the switch admitted
of, while Cut-in-Half laughed till his sides ached. Perhaps you may
think this malicious nature was now satisfied,--not a bit of it! This
was a mere beginning!

"So far Gringalet had merely endured excessive fright, been torn and
scratched by the sharp teeth and claws of Gargousse, and severely beaten
with the stick. This, however dreadful, was far from contenting
Cut-in-Half's savage nature. He therefore devised another scheme,
equally diabolical with his other proceedings. In order to enrage the
monkey still more against the unhappy boy, who by this time was more
dead than alive, he seized Gringalet by the hair of his head, and, after
feigning to overwhelm him with blows, he pushed him towards the monkey,
saying, 'Tear him! Worry him!' showing Gargousse at the same time a
great lump of sheep's heart, as much as to say, Do as I bid you, and
here is your reward.

"And then began a fearful sight! Just imagine a huge red ape, with a
black muzzle, grinding his teeth like a mad thing, and throwing
himself, in a state of savage fury, on the poor helpless object of his
cruelty, who, unable to defend himself, had no other means of preserving
his face and eyes from being torn to pieces than by throwing himself
down on the ground, flat on his face. Seeing this, Gargousse, wrought up
by his master to a state of frenzied hatred against poor Gringalet,
bestrode him as he lay on the ground, seized him by the neck, and bit
him on the back of his head till the blood came. 'Oh, the spider! The
spider I dreamed of!' cried poor Gringalet, firmly believing now that he
should be devoured. All at once a noise was heard at the gate that
opened from the lane into the yard. Knock! knock! knock!"

"Ha, ha!" exclaimed all the prisoners at once. "How delightful! 'Tis Le
Doyen come to set the boy free! Oh, tell us if it was not!"

"Yes, my good friends, you have guessed right; it was Le Doyen, and he
cried out, 'Now then, Cut-in-Half, will you open the door or no? Don't
pretend to be deaf; I see you through the keyhole.' The exhibitor of
beasts was obliged to answer, and went grumblingly along to open the
gate for Le Doyen, who was a regular brick of a man, as strong and
sturdy as a mountain for all his age, and, moreover, he was one of those
persons with whose displeasure it was anything but safe to trifle.
'Well, what do you want with me?' asked Cut-in-Half, half opening the
yard door. 'I have something to say to you,' answered Le Doyen, entering
almost forcibly into the little courtyard. Then observing the savage
conduct of the monkey, he ran towards him, seized him by the scruff of
the neck, and sought to fling him to the other end of the yard; but
perceiving that the boy and the animal were chained together, Le Doyen
cast a stern and fearful glance on Cut-in-Half, as he called out in a
severe tone, 'Let this unfortunate child loose directly!' Only conceive
the joyful surprise experienced by Gringalet, who, nearly dead with
terror, found himself so unexpectedly preserved, and by means which
seemed to him so miraculous that he could not help turning his eyes on
his preserver, with a recollection of the golden-winged fly he had seen
in his dream, though he saw merely a stout, square-built, elderly
gentleman, looking more like a creature of earth than air."

"Well, now then," said the officer on duty, "now that Gringalet is safe,
I will go and take my soup."

"Safe!" exclaimed Pique-Vinaigre, "not a bit of it! Bless you, poor
little Gringalet has not got to the worst of his troubles yet."

"No?" cried several prisoners, with the deepest interest. "No; hasn't
he, though?"

"But what else happened to him then?" inquired the officer.

"Wait a bit and you'll hear," answered the story-teller.

"What a fellow that Pique-Vinaigre is!" cried the officer; "he makes you
do just as he pleases! Well, I'll stay a little longer, at any rate!"

The Skeleton spoke not, but he actually foamed with rage, as
Pique-Vinaigre thus continued his recital:

"Cut-in-Half, who feared Le Doyen as the devil fears holy water, had, in
a grumbling manner, unfastened the chain from Gringalet's waist, which
done, Le Doyen tossed Gargousse up in the air, and when he fell to the
ground he gave him so desperate a kick in his ribs that he sent him
rolling ten feet off. The monkey screamed with passion, chattered, and
ground his teeth with rage; then, fearing a repetition of the rough
usage he had experienced, scampered away, and, climbing to the roof of a
small shed, manifested his hatred of Le Doyen by a variety of
threatening gestures. 'What do you mean by ill-using my monkey?'
inquired Cut-in-Half of Le Doyen. 'You ought rather to ask me why I do
not beat you instead of your spiteful beast there; for shame! Thus to
torture and ill-use a poor helpless boy! Is it possible you can be drunk
at this early hour of the morning?' 'I am no more drunk than you are! I
was teaching my monkey a trick I wish him to learn. I want to get up a
scene between Gringalet and my monkey. I attend to my business, and I
only wish other people would do the same, and not trouble themselves
with what does not concern them.' 'And I tell you that I have a right to
interfere in the present case, and that it is my duty so to do. This
morning when I missed Gringalet from among the other children who passed
by my window, I inquired of them where he was. They did not make me any
answer, but hung down their heads, and seemed confused. I know you,
therefore suspected the boy was kept back for some bad purpose, and it
seems I was not mistaken.

"'Now, just listen to me. Every day that I do not see Gringalet pass my
door with the other lads, I will come here to know the reason, whether
you like it or not; and what's more, you shall produce him alive and
well, or--or--or--I'll--I'll knock you down!' 'I shall do precisely as I
please with the boy, without asking your leave,' answered Cut-in-Half,
excessively irritated by this threat of keeping him under surveillance;
'you'll just please to keep your hands to yourself; and if you do not
take yourself off, and if ever you presume to show your face here again,
I'll--I'll--' 'Take that, then, as an earnest of the future!' cried Le
Doyen, interrupting Cut-in-Half by a couple of blows heavy enough to
knock down a rhinoceros; 'you deserve that and more, too, for presuming
to answer Le Doyen of La Petite Pologne in so impertinent a manner.'"

"O Lord! Lord!" groaned forth the man in the blue cap, "only two blows!
I wish I had had the handling of him. He should have had a round dozen
to begin with, and afterwards I would have knocked all his teeth down
his throat!"

"As far as strength went," continued Pique-Vinaigre, "Le Doyen could
have killed and eaten a score of such fellows as the beast-master, so
Cut-in-Half was compelled to pocket the affront. But he was not the less
incensed at being struck in the presence of Gringalet, and well did he
promise himself to be richly avenged for the indignity he had sustained;
and an idea suddenly suggested itself to him, which could only have
originated in the mind of a fiend of malice like himself. While he was
meditating on his diabolical scheme, Le Doyen said, 'Bear in mind that
if you torment this poor boy any more I will just make you and your
menagerie turn out and quit La Petite Pologne, or I will bring the whole
neighbourhood to pull your house about your ears. You know very well how
universally you are hated already, and you may rest assured you will
have such an escort to conduct you hence as shall leave you marks enough
on your back to serve as a remembrancer of your parting, let you live as
long as you may, that I promise you!'

"Like a treacherous, mean-spirited wretch as he was, Cut-in-Half, the
better to effect his villainous design, instead of quarrelling further
with Le Doyen, feigned to submit to his decision, and replied, in a
false, wheedling tone, 'You were wrong to strike me, my worthy
neighbour, or to imagine I had any intention of harming Gringalet; on
the contrary, I tell you again I was merely teaching my monkey a new
trick; he is rather awkward when he is put out in any way, and, while
trying to manage him, the boy got a few trifling bites, which I very
much regret.' 'Humph!' said Le Doyen, casting a scrutinising look on
him; 'now is this all gospel you are telling me? And why, if you only
wished to teach a thing to your monkey, did you fasten him to
Gringalet?' 'Because the boy has to learn the trick as well as the
animal. Now this is what I want to do,--to dress up Gargousse in a red
coat and a hat with a feather in it, like a barber, and then Gringalet
is to sit in a little chair, with a cloth tucked under his chin, while
the monkey affects to shave him with a large wooden razor.' The joke
appeared so very droll to Le Doyen that he could not forbear laughing.
'Isn't that a funny idea?' inquired Cut-in-Half, in a crafty and
malicious manner. 'Why, upon my word,' answered Le Doyen, 'it does
strike me as a very amusing device, and one which, I doubt not, your
monkey would carry into execution most admirably, that is, if he be as
clever and skilful in imitation as he is represented.' 'Oh, bless you!'
continued Cut-in-Half, 'when he has seen me for five or six times make
believe to shave Gringalet, he will imitate me exactly with his large
wooden razor; but for that purpose it is absolutely necessary he should
become habituated to the boy, and that was my reason for fastening them
both together.' 'But why did you select Gringalet more than any other of
your boys?' 'Because he was the least among 'em, so that, you see, when
he sat down the monkey was the taller of the two.

"'To be sure I had another reason besides, M. le Doyen, although I know
a man oughtn't to own such a thing as making a difference with his boys,
but, for all that, I'll own the truth, whatever comes of it, and that
is, that I made choice of this here little chap because I meant to give
half the profits from the performance to whoever it was acted the scene
with the animal, because I knew, in course, it was disagreeable.'
'Well,' said Le Doyen, completely gulled by this false and hypocritical
manner of accounting for the conduct which had first attracted his
displeasure,--'well, if such be the case, I can only say, I'm very sorry
I gave you such a very hard thump; however, it does not matter, just
consider it as "paid on account," so that--' While Cut-in-Half was
talking with Le Doyen, poor little Gringalet durst scarcely breathe,--he
trembled like an aspen leaf, and, though dying with eagerness to throw
himself at the feet of Le Doyen, and to supplicate of him to take him
away from his cruel master, he had not courage to make the attempt, and
in a low despairing voice he murmured to himself, 'I shall be like the
poor fly I dreamed about, and the horrid spider will eat me up; it was
folly of me to expect that any golden fly would come to save me!'

"'Come, my lad, since your master means to let you share his profits,
you ought to try and get used to acting with the monkey; never mind
being tied to him, he won't hurt you, I dare say, and then, you know,
when you have earned a large sum of money by doing this trick with him,
you will have nothing to complain of.' 'Complain, indeed!' exclaimed his
master, giving him at the same time a side-look that froze poor
Gringalet's blood, 'what should he know of complaining? Now then, speak
up, and tell this worthy gentleman whether you ever have had anything to
complain of.' 'Come, let's hear all about it,--have you any cause of
complaint, you are asked?' 'No--no--master,' stammered out the unhappy
child. 'You hear what he says?' said Cut-in-Half, turning to Le Doyen,
'he never has had anything to complain of. No; I should rather think
not! Why, bless you, I was only thinking of his good when I tied him to
the monkey, and if he has got a bit of a scratch from Gargousse, why,
I'll take care it does not happen again. The monkey is just a little
awkward at first, but I'll see to it for the future,--take my word for
it, it won't happen again.' 'That's all right, then, and now everybody's
satisfied, are they not?' 'Gringalet is, most especially; are you not,
my fine fellow?' asked Cut-in-Half, casting a savage glance on the poor
child. 'Yes--yes--master,' sobbed forth the wretched boy. 'And I'll tell
you what I'll do further, to make up for the scratches you have got from
the monkey, I'll let you share in a good breakfast I meant to order
from our worthy Doyen's excellent larder; I intend having a dish of
mutton-chops and pickles, four bottles of wine, and a pint of brandy.'
'Much obliged to you,' answered Le Doyen; 'all shall be sent as you
desire. Few men have a better cellar or more tempting larder, and the
contents of both are at the service of all who can pay for them.'

"Le Doyen was not a bad sort of a man, but it must be remembered that he
had his living to get, and, therefore, so that he disposed of his
eatables and drinkables at a sufficient profit, he cared but little who
it was in that case,--friend or foe were quite alike to him. The beggar,
Cut-in-Half, knew well enough where his weak side lay, so he hit upon
this method of getting rid of him, in high good humour at having by his
visit not only ascertained the safety of Gringalet, but also obtained a
good order. And now was the unfortunate child thrown into the hands of
his master, past all hopes of safety; for no sooner had Le Doyen turned
his back than Cut-in-Half, pointing to the staircase with a dreadful
frown, bade the trembling lad betake himself to his garret without loss
of time; and the frightened child, glad at any rate to be freed from the
monkey and his master, did not require a second bidding, but made off as
fast as his strength permitted him. When Gringalet reached his own
wretched chamber, he threw himself on the dirty straw allotted him for a
bed beside his tortoise, and wept as though his heart were breaking. 'He
will surely kill me!' cried the miserable boy, as he reflected on the
cruelty of his master and his own inability to escape from him. 'What
shall I do? Oh, how I wish I were dead and in my grave!' Thus he
remained sobbing and lamenting for more than an hour, when he was roused
by hearing the coarse voice of Cut-in-Half calling upon him to descend.
And the terror of the boy was still further increased by discovering a
considerable alteration in the rough tones of his master. 'Now, then!'
roared out the brutal man, with a torrent of oaths, 'are you coming
down, or must I fetch you?' The unhappy child almost slid down the
ladder in his haste to descend, but scarcely had he reached the bottom
than Cut-in-Half seized hold of him, and dragged him to his own room,
stumbling at every step he took; for the fellow had been drinking so
hard that he could scarcely stand on his legs, while his body swung to
and fro like the sails of a windmill.

"Almost bereft by extreme intoxication of the power of speech, he
continued to gaze on the shrinking child with eyes full of dreadful
meaning, though his tongue was unable to declare the murderous designs
he meditated. Never had the poor boy endured such horror at the sight of
his master. Gargousse was chained as usual to the foot of the bed, and
in the middle of the room stood a chair, from the back of which hung a
strong cord. 'S--s--sit down--there!' cried the tyrant, as he pointed to
the seat. Gringalet obeyed in silence, and Cut-in-Half, without another
word, twisted the rope around him, and finally secured him in the chair
so firmly that, even if poor Gringalet had dared to struggle, it would
have been impossible for him to have extricated himself. 'Great and good
God!' murmured the wretched child, 'this time no one will come to
deliver me from my danger!' And the poor little fellow was right, for,
indeed, it was utterly impossible, and for this reason, that no sooner
had Le Doyen gone away with the idea of all being comfortably arranged
between the boy and his master than Cut-in-Half hastened to double-lock
and bolt the entrance to his premises, so that no person could gain
admission without his knowledge."

"Oh, poor little Gringalet!" exclaimed all the prisoners, deeply excited
by the recital, "it's all up with him, that's quite sure."

"I'd give my last franc-piece to get him out of the hands of that
blackguard--that I would!" cried a multitude of voices, as though one
unanimous sympathy actuated each breast.

"I wonder what that beggar of a Cut-in-Half is going to do with the poor
little chap!" added they, in almost breathless interest; "come, push on,
and let's hear."

Pique-Vinaigre continued:

"When Gringalet was well secured in the chair, his master said to him"
(and here the narrator imitated most naturally the thick speech and
stammering tones of a drunken man): 'Ah--you scoundrel!--you--you are
the--cause of--my being thrashed by Le Doyen!--you shall--die--for
it--you shall--you--young--devil!' Then he took from his pocket a
freshly sharpened razor, opened it, and seized Gringalet by the hair of
his head. At the sight of the razor the child began to weep. 'Pardon,
master! Pardon! Do not kill me!' 'Cry away, you infernal brat! You shall
not cry long!' replied Cut-in-Half. 'Golden fly, golden fly, come to my
help!' exclaimed poor Gringalet, almost mad, and remembering the dream
that had had such an effect upon him, 'for the spider is going to kill
me!' 'What!--you call--call--me a spider--do you?' said Cut-in-Half;
'for this--and--other--many other things--you shall die--die, I tell
you--but not by my hand--because that wouldn't do--and besides--they'd
"scrag" me--and so I'll say and prove that it was the ape. I have
managed it all--and so--never mind--for that's all about it!' he added,
preserving his equilibrium with the greatest difficulty. Then calling
the monkey, which, at the end of his chain, was grinning and looking at
his master and the boy, 'Here, Gargousse,' he said, pointing to the
razor, and then to Gringalet, whom he had seized by the hair of his
head, 'do so to him;' and then drawing the back of the razor several
times over Gringalet's throat, he feigned to cut his throat. The devil
of a monkey was such a close imitator--so wicked and so sly--that he
understood what his master desired, and as if to prove to him that he
did so, he took his chin in his left paw, put his head back, and, with
his right paw, pretended to cut his throat. 'That's it,
Gargousse--that's it!' said Cut-in-Half, stammering, with his eyes half
closed, and staggering so much that he almost fell with Gringalet and
the chair. 'Yes, that's it! I'll unfas--unfasten you, and you'll slice
his weasand--won't you, Gargousse?' The ape shrieked as he ground his
teeth, as much as to say yes, and put out his paw as if to take the
razor that Cut-in-Half handed to him. 'Golden fly, come to my rescue!'
murmured Gringalet, in a faint voice, and assured that his last hour was
come. Alas! he called the golden fly without any hopes of its coming to
his rescue; he did so as a drowning man exclaims, '_Mon Dieu! mon
Dieu!_' Yet at this very moment Gringalet saw enter into the room one of
those small gold and green flies, which look like a spangle of gold
flying and flitting around and about; and at the very moment when
Cut-in-Half was going to give the razor to Gargousse, the gold fly went
plump into the eye of this horrible ruffian. A fly in the eye is no
great thing, but at the moment it hurts like the prick of a pin, and
thus Cut-in-Half, who could scarcely support himself, raised his hand to
his eye so suddenly that he staggered and fell at full length, rolling
on the ground like a log to the foot of the bed, to which Gargousse was
fastened. 'Golden fly, many thanks! You have saved me!' cried Gringalet,
who, seated and fastened to the chair, had observed all."

"_Ma foi!_ It really was true, then, and the golden fly prevented his
having his throat cut," exclaimed the prisoners, overjoyed.

"The golden fly for ever!" cried the Blue Cap.

"Listen now," continued the story-teller, "for this is the most
beautiful and terrible of the history I had promised you. Cut-in-Half
had fallen like a lump of lead, and was so drunk that he could move no
more than a log,--he was dead drunk and perfectly senseless; but in his
fall he very nearly crushed Gargousse, and almost broke his hind paw.
You know how savage and revengeful this infernal brute was, and he still
held in his paw the razor which his master had given him to cut
Gringalet's throat. What do you suppose the animal did when he saw his
master on his back and within his reach? Why, he jumped upon him,
squatted on his breast, and whilst with one paw he pushed up his chin to
expose his neck, with the other he cut his throat as clean as a whistle,
just as Cut-in-Half had taught him to do with poor Gringalet a few
minutes before."

"Bravo, bravo! Well done!"

"Gargousse for ever!"

"The little golden fly for ever!"

"Gringalet for ever! Gargousse for ever!"

"Well, my friends, I assure you, as you shout now, so did the whole
population of La Petite Pologne shout an hour afterwards," said
Pique-Vinaigre, delighted at the success of his story and the enthusiasm
of his hearers.

"In what way?"

"I told you that, in order to complete his wicked purpose at his ease,
the vagabond Cut-in-Half had closed the door inside. Towards the
evening, the boys came in one after the other with their animals. The
first rapped, but no answer; then, when they had all arrived, they
knocked at the door, but no reply; so one went to find Le Doyen to tell
him how they had knocked in vain, and that their master did not open to
them. 'The fellow must be as drunk as an Englishman,' said he; 'I sent
him some wine just now. We must break open the door, for the children
cannot pass the night out-of-doors.' So they burst in the door, and then
they went up the stairs, and what should they see but Gargousse chained
and crouching on his master's body, playing with the razor! Poor
Gringalet was fortunately out of Gargousse's reach and still on the
chair, not daring to look on Cut-in-Half's body, but gazing at,--guess
what, the little golden fly, which, after having flitted round and round
the child as if to congratulate him, had, at last, come and settled on
his poor little hand.

"Gringalet related all to Le Doyen and the crowd that came in, and, as
it really appeared like the interposition of Providence, Le Doyen cried,
'A triumph for Gringalet! A triumph to Gargousse who killed the infamous
Cut-in-Half! He cut others, it was his turn to be cut himself.' 'Yes,
yes,' cried the assembled mob, for the beast-shower was universally
detested, 'a triumph to Gargousse! A triumph for Gringalet!' It was
night, and they lighted straw torches, fastened Gargousse to a bench,
which four chaps carried on their shoulders; and the blackguard of an
ape seemed as if he felt his consequence, and gave himself the airs of a
conquering hero, by showing his teeth to the multitude. After the ape
came Le Doyen, carrying Gringalet in his arms; then all the little
fellows, each carrying his beast, followed him, one with his fox,
another his marmotte, another his guinea-pig; and those who played on
the hurdy-gurdy played now; then there were the charcoal-sellers who had
their bells, and there was such an uproar, such joy, such a fête as can
be scarcely imagined. Behind the musicians and animal-showers came all
the dwellers in La Petite Pologne, men, women, and children, all holding
straw torches, and halloaing like mad, 'Vive Gringalet! Vive Gargousse!'
The procession advanced in this way around the place in which
Cut-in-Half dwelt. It was a very singular sight to see the old buildings
lighted up by the red light of the straw torches, which flared and
flared. As to Gringalet, the first thing he did when he was at liberty
was to put the little golden fly in a paper bag, and he exclaimed during
his triumph, 'Little flies, I did very right in preventing the spiders
from eating you, for--'"

Pique-Vinaigre was interrupted by a voice from without, exclaiming:

"Père Roussel, come to your soup; it only wants ten minutes to four!"

"_Ma foi!_ The story is nearly finished, and I must go. Many thanks, my
lad, you have amused me very much, and that you may tell everybody,"
said the superintendent to Pique-Vinaigre, going to the door; then
pausing, "Mind and be quiet," he said, turning towards the prisoners.

"We shall hear the end of the story," said the Skeleton, breathless with
suppressed rage; then, adding in a whisper to Gros-Boiteux, "Follow him
to the door, and, when you see him leave the yard, cry Gargousse, and
the informer is a dead man."

"All right," said Le Gros-Boiteux, who accompanied the guardian, and
remained at the door watching his steps as he went away.

"I tell you, then," resumed Pique-Vinaigre, "that Gringalet, during the
whole time of his triumph, said, 'Little flies, I have--'"

"Gargousse!" cried Gros-Boiteux, as the turnkey quitted the yard.

"I'm here, Gringalet, and I will be your spider!" cried the Skeleton,
instantly, and darting so suddenly on Germain that he could not make a
struggle or utter a cry. His voice expired under the tremendous gripe of
the Skeleton's iron fingers.

"If you are the spider, I'm the golden fly, Skeleton of evil," cried a
voice, at the moment when Germain, surprised at the violent and sudden
attack of his implacable enemy, had fallen back on the bench entirely at
the mercy of the ruffian, who, with his knee on his breast, held him by
the neck. "Yes, I will be the fly, and a fly of the right sort!"
repeated the man in the blue cap, of whom we have already spoken, and
then, with a fierce spring, he dashed upon the Skeleton, and assailed
him on the skull and between his eyes with a shower of blows from his
fist, so tremendous that it sounded like the noise of a smith's hammer
ringing on an anvil.

[Illustration: "_The Skeleton Staggered at First_"
Original Etching by Marcel]

The man in the blue cap, who was no other than the Chourineur, added, as
he redoubled the quickness of his hammering on the Skeleton's head:

"It is the shower of blows which M. Rodolph drummed on my sconce, and I
have recollected them."

At this unexpected assault the prisoners were all struck with surprise,
and did not take part either for or against the Chourineur. Several of
them, still under the influence of the salutary impression made on them
by Pique-Vinaigre's story, were even glad of an event which saved
Germain. The Skeleton staggered at first, and, reeling like an ox under
the butcher's poleaxe, mechanically extended his hands to try and ward
off his adversary's blows, and Germain, thus freed from the deadly
clutch of the Skeleton, half raised himself.

"What does this mean? Who is this scoundrel?" exclaimed Le Gros-Boiteux,
and, rushing at the Chourineur, he endeavoured to seize his arms from
behind, whilst the latter was making violent efforts to keep the
Skeleton down on the bench. Germain's defender replied to Le
Gros-Boiteux's attack by a kind of kick, so violent that it sent the
cripple rolling on the ground to the farther end of the circle formed by
the prisoners.

Germain, whose face was livid and purple, half suffocated, and on his
knees by the bench, seemed unconscious of all that was passing around
him. The strangulation had been so violent that he could scarcely
breathe.

After his first surprise was over, the Skeleton, by a desperate effort,
contrived to keep the Chourineur off and regain his feet. Breathless,
drunk with rage and hatred, he was fearful to look upon. His cadaverous
face streamed with blood, his upper lip curled like that of a furious
wolf, exposed his teeth clenched against each other. At last he
exclaimed, in a voice palpitating with anger and exertion, for his
struggle had been very violent:

"Stab him,--the ruffian!--you cowards, who let me be traitorously
attacked, or the informer will escape!"

During this momentary truce, the Chourineur, raising Germain half
fainting, had managed very cleverly to put him in an angle of the wall,
and, availing himself of this advantageous position of defence, he was
able, without fear of surprise from behind, to resist any attack of the
prisoners, on whom the skill and herculean powers he had displayed had
imposed considerable respect.

Pique-Vinaigre, greatly alarmed, had disappeared without his absence
being remarked.

Seeing hesitation amongst the majority of prisoners, the Skeleton
exclaimed:

"Aid me now, let us do for both, the big 'un as well as the little 'un!"

"Look out for squalls, then," replied the Chourineur, preparing for a
struggle, with his two hands squared, and standing well-balanced on his
loins; "and mind your eye, Skeleton! If you mean to play the
Cut-in-Half, I'll serve you as Gargousse did, and slit your weasand."

"Fall on him!" said Le Gros-Boiteux, getting up.

"Why does this vagabond defend spies? Death to the informer, and to him,
too! If he defends Germain he is a traitor!"

"Yes, yes, death to the spy! Death!"

"Yes, and death to the traitor who defends him!"

Such were the cries uttered by the fiercest of the _détenus_. Another
party, more merciful, exclaimed:

"No, let's hear him first!"

"Yes, let him explain; we mustn't kill a man without a hearing!"

"And without means of defence, too! Must we be Cut-in-Halfs?"

"So much the better!" replied the Skeleton's partisans.

"Nothing's too bad for a spy!"

"Let's fall on him! Let us support the Skeleton!"

"Yes, let's at the Blue Cap!"

"No, let's support the Blue Cap, and let's at the Skeleton!" retorted
the Chourineur's party.

"No, down with the Blue Cap!"

"Down with the Skeleton!"

"Well done, my boys!" cried the Chourineur, addressing the prisoners who
sided with him. "You're good fellows, and would not massacre a half dead
man; none but cowards would do that. The Skeleton does not care what
evil he does; he is sentenced beforehand, and that is why he urges you
on; but if you help to kill Germain, you will be severely punished for
it. Besides, I have something to propose. The Skeleton is desirous of
doing for this young man; well, let him come and take him if he thinks
he has the pluck to do it; let us two settle it; leave us to ourselves,
and see what turns up. But he's afraid; he's like Cut-in-Half, only
strong with the weak."

The vigour, energy, and rough manner of the Chourineur had powerful
effect on the prisoners, and a considerable number of them had ranged
themselves on his side, and surrounded Germain, whilst the Skeleton's
party drew around that ruffian. A bloody fray would have ensued, when
there was heard in the yard the sonorous and measured tread of a piquet
of infantry, always on guard in the prison. Pique-Vinaigre, profiting by
the general stir and noise, had gained the yard, and, having knocked at
the wicket of the entrance, had told the turnkeys what was passing in
the day-room. The arrival of the soldiers put an end to this scene.
Germain, the Skeleton, and the Chourineur were taken before the
governor of La Force; the first to make his complaint, the two others to
answer for creating a disturbance inside the gaol.

The fright and suffering of Germain had been so great, his weakness so
extreme, that he was obliged to lean on two of the turnkeys, in order to
reach a chamber next to the governor's room. There he was very ill. His
neck, excoriated as it was, bore the livid and bleeding imprint of the
Skeleton's iron grasp; a few minutes more, and Rigolette's betrothed
would have been strangled. The turnkey, who had taken an interest in
Germain, gave him first assistance. When he had recovered, his first
thought was of his deliverer.

"Thanks for your kind cares, sir," he said to the turnkey. "But for that
brave man, I must have been killed. Where is he?"

"In the governor's room, telling him how the disturbance arose. It
appears that but for him--"

"I must have been killed. Oh, tell me his name! Who is he?"

"His name I do not know, but they call him the Chourineur; he is an old
offender."

"And is his crime now very serious?"

"Very; burglary in the night in an inhabited house," replied the
turnkey. "He will probably have a similar dose to Pique-Vinaigre,
fifteen or twenty years of hard labour."

Germain shuddered; he would have preferred being bound by gratitude to a
man less criminal.

"How dreadful!" he said. "And yet this man without knowing me defended
me; such courage, such generosity!"

"Ah, these men have sometimes a touch of good! The main point is that
you are saved. To-morrow you will have your private cell, and to-night
you will sleep in the infirmary. So, courage, sir. The bad time is over;
and when your pretty little visitor comes to see you, you can comfort
her, for once in a cell you have nothing to fear; only you will do
wisely, I think, not to tell her of this affair."

"Certainly not; but I should like to thank my defender."

"I have just been leaving the governor, who will now interrogate the
Skeleton, and I shall take them both, the Skeleton to his dungeon
directly, and the Chourineur to the Fosse aux Lions; he will be,
besides, somewhat rewarded for what he has done for you; as he is a
determined and stout fellow, he will probably replace the Skeleton as
captain of the ward."

The Chourineur, having crossed a small passage from the governor's
apartment, entered the room in which Germain was.

"Wait for me here," said the turnkey to the Chourineur. "I will go and
ask the governor what he decides upon as to the Skeleton, and I will
return and let you know. Our young man has quite recovered, and wishes
to thank you, and so he should, for otherwise it would have been all
over with him." And the turnkey went out.

The Chourineur's countenance was very joyous, and he advanced towards
Germain, saying, with a cheerful air:

"Thunder! How glad I am! How glad I saved you!" and he extended his hand
to Germain, who, by a feeling of involuntary repulsion, withdrew
somewhat, instead of taking the hand which the Chourineur offered to
him; then, remembering that he owed his life to this man, he was
desirous of repairing this display of repugnance. But the Chourineur
perceived it; his features became overcast, and, retreating in his turn,
he said, with bitter sorrow, "Oh, it is right; your pardon, sir!"

"No, it is I who ought to ask your pardon; am I not a prisoner like
yourself? Ought I not to think of the service you have rendered me? You
have saved my life. Your hand, sir, I beg--I entreat--your hand!"

"Thanks; but it is useless now. The first feeling is everything. If you
had directly given me a grasp of the hand, it would have afforded me
pleasure, but, when I reflect, I would not desire it. Not because I am a
prisoner like you," he added, with a sombre and hesitating air,
"because, before I came here, I have been--"

"The turnkey told me all," said Germain, interrupting him; "but yet you
saved my life."

"I have done no more than my duty and pleasure, for I know who you
are--Monsieur Germain."

"You know me!"

"A little, my lad," said the Chourineur, resuming his usual tone of
habitual carelessness; "and, _pardieu!_ you would have been very wrong
to have attributed my arrival at La Force to chance. If I had not known
you, I should not have been in prison."

Germain looked at the Chourineur with amazement.

"What! It was because you knew me?"

"That I am here a prisoner in La Force."

"I, who owe you--"

"A candle to the Virgin, for having procured me the advantage of being
in La Force."

"Really," said Germain, passing his hand over his brow. "I do not know
whether the terrible shock I have just undergone has weakened my senses,
but it is impossible for me to understand you. The turnkey told me you
were here under a charge of--of--" said Germain, with hesitation.

"Robbery, _pardieu_! And robbery with forcible entry, and moreover at
night; nothing could be more complete!" cried the Chourineur, with a
hearty laugh.

Germain, painfully excited at the bold hardihood of the Chourineur,
could not forbear saying to him:

"What, you, so brave, so generous, and speak in this way! Are you not
aware of the terrible punishment to which you are exposed?"

"Twenty years at the galleys; I know that. I am an out-and-out
scoundrel, I know that, for taking it so easy. But what's the use when
one has been and done it? And then, for me to say that it was you, M.
Germain," added the Chourineur, heaving a tremendous sigh, and with an
air of assumed contrition, "who are the cause of my misfortune."

"When you explain yourself more clearly, I shall understand you. Just as
much as you please, but my gratitude for the service you have rendered
me will never cease or diminish," added Germain, sorrowfully.

"Oh, pardon me, M. Germain!" replied the Chourineur, becoming serious.
"You do not like to see me laugh at this; do not let us add another
word. I must let all out with you, and so, perhaps, force you to shake
my hand."

"I have no doubt of that; for, in spite of the crime of which you are
accused, and of which you accuse yourself, all in you bespeaks so much
courage and frankness that I am convinced you are charged unjustly;
strong suspicions may exist, but I am sure that is all."

"Oh, as to that you are mistaken, M. Germain!" said the Chourineur,
hastily; "on my word as a man, and as true as I have a protector,"--the
Chourineur took off his cap,--"who is more than all the world to me, I
robbed at night by forcing the shutter, and was caught in the fact and
deprived of all I was endeavouring to carry off."

"But want--hunger--pushed you to such an extremity?"

"Hunger! I had one hundred and twenty francs when they apprehended me,
the remains of a note of one thousand francs, without including the
protector I have mentioned to you, who, by the way, does not know that I
am here, but will not let me want for anything. Since, however, I have
mentioned him to you, you must suppose I am in earnest, for you must
know that he is a man to go on your knees before. So I must tell you,
too, that the shower of blows which I drummed on the Skeleton's sconce
was a sketch after his style, copied from nature. The idea of the
robbery was on his account; and, in fact, if you were not strangled by
the Skeleton, it is through him."

"But this protector?"

"Is yours also."

"Mine!"

"Yes, M. Rodolph protects you. When I say monsieur, I should say
monseigneur, for he is at least a prince; but I have a habit of calling
him M. Rodolph, which he permits me to do."

"You are under some mistake," said Germain, more and more surprised; "I
do not know the prince."

"Yes, but he knows you. You don't believe it? Well, that's possible, for
that's his way. He knows that there is some worthy fellow in trouble,
and then, in an instant, the good fellow is comforted, and, without
being seen or known, he is at work, and kindness falls from the skies,
like a tile from a house on your head. So patience, and one day or other
you will have your tile."

"Really, what you say amazes me!"

"Ah, you'll have a great deal more to amaze you yet! To return to my
protector: Some time ago, after a service which he persisted I had done
him, he procured me a splendid position, I need not say where, or any
more about it, for it would be a long tale to tell. Well, he sends me to
Marseilles to embark and go to a capital appointment in Algeria. I left
Paris as happy as a child; but, all of a sudden, a change comes over
me."

"That was singular!"

"Why, you must know that once separated from M. Rodolph I was uneasy,
disturbed, as fidgety as a dog who has lost his master. It was very
stupid; but so are dogs, sometimes, but that does not prevent them from
being at least attached, and as well mindful of the nice bits given them
as of the thumps and kicks they have had, and M. Rodolph had given me
many nice bits, and, in truth, M. Rodolph is everything to me. From
being a riotous, dare-devil, good-for-nothing blackguard, he made an
honest man of me by only saying two words, just for all the world like
magic."

"What were the words he said?"

"He said I had still heart and honour, although I have been at the
galleys, not for having stolen, it is true,--ah, never that,--but what
perhaps is worse, for having killed,--yes," said the Chourineur, in a
gloomy tone, "killed in a moment of passion, because formerly growing up
like a brute beast, or, rather, as a vagabond, without father or mother,
and left abandoned in the streets of Paris, I knew neither God nor
devil--neither good nor evil. Sometimes the blood mounted to my eyes,
and I saw red, and if I had a knife in my hands I slashed and hacked,--I
was a real savage--a beast, and only lived amongst thieves and
scoundrels. I was in the mud, and in the mud I lived as well as I could.
But when M. Rodolph said to me that since, in spite of the contempt of
all the world and my misery, instead of plundering like others I had
preferred working as long as I could, and for what I could, that showed
I had still heart and honour--thunder!--you see these two words had the
same effect on me as if I had been seized by the hair of my head and
lifted a thousand feet into the air above the vermin with whom I dwelt,
and showed me the filth in which my life was spent. So I said, 'Thank
ye, I've had enough of this!' Then my heart beat with something else
besides anger, and I took an oath to myself always to preserve that
honour which M. Rodolph spoke of. You see, M. Germain, that when M.
Rodolph told me so kindly that I was not so bad as I believed myself to
be, that encouraged me, and, thanks to him, I became better than I had
been."

When he heard this language, Germain comprehended less and less how the
Chourineur had committed the robbery of which he accused himself.

"No," he said to himself, "it is impossible; the man who was so exalted
at the two words honour and heart cannot have committed the robbery of
which he talks with so much self-complacency."

The Chourineur continued, without remarking the astonishment of Germain:

"To say the truth, what made me be like a dog to his master to M.
Rodolph was that he raised me in my own opinion. Before I knew him I
never felt but on my skin, but he moved me inwardly, and to the bottom
of my heart. Once away from him and the place he inhabited, I felt like
a body without a soul. In proportion as I proceeded farther I said to
myself, 'He leads such a strange life,--mixes with such scamps (I can
answer for that), that he risks his body twenty times a day, and, under
some such circumstances, I may be his dog and defend my master, for I am
strong in the jaws;' but then he had said to me,'My good fellow, you
must become useful to others, therefore go where you can be
serviceable.' I was very nearly replying, 'I have no one to serve but
you, M. Rodolph,' but I daredn't. He said to me, 'Go,' and I went, and
have gone as far as I could; but, thunder! when I ought to have gone on
board the ship, left France, and put the sea between M. Rodolph and
myself, I had not the courage. He had desired his correspondent to give
me a great lump of money when I sailed, so I went to the gentleman, and
said to him, 'Sir, I can't do it--I'd rather do anything, so please to
give me enough to pay my journey on foot; I have good legs, and I will
return to Paris, for I cannot leave France. M. Rodolph will be angry,
and, perhaps, refuse to see me,--that's possible; but I shall see him,
know where he is, and if he goes on as usual, sooner or later I may,
perhaps, arrive in time to come between him and a stab with a knife; and
then I really cannot go so far away from him! Something I cannot account
for attracts me to his side.' Well, they gave me sufficient to pay my
way, and I reached Paris. Then I really was frightened. What could I say
to M. Rodolph to excuse myself? But, after all, he would not eat me up;
so I went to find his friend, a tall, bald-headed man, but a right sort
of fellow as ever broke bread. When I saw M. Murphy, I said,'Now my fate
will be decided;' and my throat was dry, and my heart beat such a pace!
I expected to catch it pretty handsomely, but, what d'ye think? Why, the
worthy gentleman received me just as if we had only parted the previous
evening, and told me that M. Rodolph, instead of being angry, wished to
see me as soon as possible. Well, so I went at once to my
protector,--him with such a stout fist and good heart,--and when I was
face to face with him he who is as terrible as a lion and as gentle as a
child--he who is a prince, and yet puts on a blouse like me--and once on
a time (I bless the day, or night, rather) laid on me such a shower of
blows that I saw nothing but fire, why, M. Germain, when I reflected on
all the agreeable qualities he is master of, I felt completely overcome,
and I snivelled like a woman. Well, instead of laughing at me, for I
must be a rum-looking lot when I pipe my eye, M. Rodolph said to me,
seriously, 'Here you are back again, my good fellow, eh?' 'Yes, M.
Rodolph, and pray excuse me if I have done wrong, but I could not help
it. Give me some corner in your courtyard, give me a crust and a glass,
or let me earn it here,--that's all I ask, and pray don't be angry with
me for coming back.' 'So far from it, my man, you have come back just in
time to do me a service.' 'I, M. Rodolph? Is that possible? Well, there
must have been something above, for if not, how could I explain how it
was I must come back here at the very moment when you wanted me? What
can I do for you, M. Rodolph?' 'An honest, worthy young man, in whom I
take the interest I should do in a son, has been unjustly accused of
robbery, and is a prisoner in La Force. His name is Germain; he is of a
gentle, quiet disposition. The wretches with whom he is confined have
conceived a great aversion for him, and he is in great danger. You
unfortunately have known what a prison life is, and a great many
prisoners; could not you, in case there may be any of your old
companions in La Force (we will find that out), go and see them, and, by
promises of money, which shall be duly performed, induce them to protect
this unfortunate young man?'"

"But who can this generous and unknown man be, who takes so much
interest in my fate?" asked Germain, more and more surprised.

"You will learn, perhaps, hereafter,--as for me, I do not know. To
return to my conversation with M. Rodolph. Whilst he was speaking to me
there came an idea into my head, so curious, so whimsical, that I could
not forbear laughing outright before him. 'What is it, my lad?' said he.
'Why, M. Rodolph, I laugh because I am so happy, and I am happy because
I have the means of putting your M. Germain quite safe from any ill-will
on the part of the prisoners, of giving him a protector who will defend
him boldly, for when once the young fellow is under the care of the man
I mean, not one will dare look at him impertinently.' 'Very good--one of
your old comrades, no doubt?' 'Exactly so, M. Rodolph; he has been in La
Force some days, that I know. But I must have some money.' 'How much
shall you require,--a note for a thousand francs? Here it is.' 'Thank
ye, M. Rodolph; in two days you will have some news.'"

"I begin to understand, or, rather, I'm afraid to understand," exclaimed
Germain. "To come and protect me in this prison you have, perhaps,
committed a robbery? Oh, what remorse will beset all my life!"

"Hold hard! M. Rodolph had said I had heart and honour,---these words
are my law, you must know; and he may still say it to me, for if I am
no better than I was before, at least I am no worse."

"But this robbery, if you have not committed it, why are you here?"

"Listen! There is a capital joke with my thousand francs, I bought
myself a black wig, shaved my whiskers, put on blue spectacles, bent my
head on one side, and made up my back as if it were humped, and then
went in search of two apartments to let, on the ground floor, in a
bustling part of the city. I found what I looked for in the Rue de
Provence, and paid a month in advance, under the name of M. Grégoire.
Next day I went to the Temple to buy furniture for my two rooms, with my
black wig, my hump, and blue glasses, so that I might be easily
recognised. Well, I sent the goods to the Rue de Provence, and,
moreover, six silver spoons, which I bought in the Boulevard St. Denis,
still disguised with my hump. I returned then to arrange all my affairs
in my residence. I told the porter I should not sleep there until the
following night, and took away my key. The windows of the two rooms were
closed with strong shutters. Before I went away I had purposely left one
with the bolt undrawn. The night came, and I put off my wig, my
spectacles, my hump, and the clothes in which I had made my purchases
and hired my apartments, putting this suit in a portmanteau, which I
forwarded to M. Murphy, M. Rodolph's friend, begging him to take care of
it for me. I then bought this blouse, and the blue cotton cap, and a bar
of iron two feet long; and at one o'clock in the morning I went into the
Rue de Provence, where I lurked about before my lodging, awaiting the
moment when the patrol would pass and prevent my robbing
myself,--committing a burglary on my own premises, in order to be caught
and apprehended."

And the Chourineur burst into a fit of hearty laughter.

"I begin to understand," cried Germain.

"But I was nearly getting in a 'fix,' for no patrol passed. I might have
robbed myself twenty times with the greatest ease and safety. At last,
about two o'clock in the morning, I heard the tread of the soldier boys,
and then I pushed open the window, jumped into the room, pocketed the
silver spoons and some other trifles. Fortunately the lively patrol had
heard the smash of the windows, and just as I leaped out of the window
they laid hands upon me. They knocked at the door, which the porter
opened, they sent for the sergeant of police, who came. The porter told
him that the two rooms had been hired that morning by a humpbacked
gentleman, with black hair and blue spectacles, whose name was Grégoire.
I had the thick head of hair which you now see, and my eyes were as wide
open as a hare's on the watch, was as upright as a Russian sentinel, and
could not be taken for a humpbacked gentleman, with blue glasses and
black hair. I confessed all, and was conducted to the station, and from
the station to this prison, where I arrived in the nick of time to
snatch from the clutch of the Skeleton the young man of whom M. Rodolph
had said to me, 'I am interested in him as much as if he were my own
son.'"

"What do I not owe you for such devotion?"

"Not to me,--you owe it to M. Rodolph."

"But whence arises his interest in me?"

"That is for him to tell you, or, perhaps, he will not tell you, for he
very often chooses to do good, and if you ask him why, he will not let
you know."

"M. Rodolph, then, knows you are here?"

"I'm not such a fool as to tell him my plans; perhaps he would not have
consented to my whim, and, really, I must say it was capital."

"But what risks you have run,--indeed, still run."

"Oh, what risk? I might not have been brought to La Force,--that was the
worst risk,--but I relied on M. Rodolph's interest to have my prison
changed, so that I might have got to you."

"But at your trial?"

"Well, I shall beg M. Murphy to send me the portmanteau. Before the
judge I shall appear in my black wig, blue spectacles, and hump, and
shall be again M. Grégoire for the porter who let me the chambers and
the tradespeople who sold me the goods. So much for the robbery. If they
wish to see the thief again, I'll put off my suit, and then it will be
as clear as daylight that the robber and the robbed together only make a
total of the Chourineur and no more. And what the devil would you expect
when it is proved that I robbed myself?"

"Why, indeed," said Germain, more assured; "but since you take so much
interest in me, why did you not speak to me when you came first into the
prison?"

"I knew instantly of the scheme against you by the prisoners, and I
might have denounced them before Pique-Vinaigre began or ended his
story; but to denounce such ruffians did not suit my ideas,--I preferred
trusting only to my fist in order to snatch you from the clutch of the
Skeleton; and when I saw that scoundrel I said to myself, 'This is a
fine opportunity for putting in practice that shower of blows to which I
owe the honour of M. Rodolph's acquaintance.'"

"But if all the prisoners had taken part against you, alone, what could
you have done?"

"Why, then, I should have shrieked like an eagle and called lustily for
help. But I preferred having my little affair all to myself, that I
might be able to say to M. Rodolph, 'I was all alone in the matter. I
have defended and will defend your friend,--be easy on that subject.'"

At this moment the turnkey suddenly returned to the apartment.

"Monsieur Germain, go to the governor; he wishes to speak to you
immediately. And you, Chourineur, go down into the Fosse-aux-Lions; you
are to be _prévôt_, if you like, for you have all the qualifications for
that duty, and the prisoners will not joke with a man of your sort."

"It is all the same to me, I'd as soon be captain as private."

"Will you refuse my hand now?" said Germain, cordially.

"_Ma foi!_ no, M. Germain! I'll shake hands with all my heart."

"We shall see one another again, for I am now under your protection. I
shall have nothing more to fear, and shall, therefore, come down every
day from my cell into the yard."

"Make yourself quite easy on that score. But now I think of it, write a
line to M. Rodolph, who will then no longer be uneasy about you, and
will also learn that I am here for a good reason, for if he were to hear
that I had committed a robbery, and did not know all the real
facts,--thunder! That would not do by any means."

"Make your mind easy. I will write this very evening to my unknown
protector. Once more, good-bye, and thanks most heartily, my worthy
friend."

"Good-bye, M. Germain. I must return to those scoundrels, and I'll make
them go right; if not, let them look out for squalls!"

"When I reflect that it is on my account that you must remain some time
longer with these wretches--"

"What consequence is that? There is no fear of their turning on me;" and
the Chourineur followed the turnkey.

Germain went to the governor. What was his surprise to find Rigolette
there! pale, agitated, and her eyes bathed in tears; and yet smiling
through her tears, her countenance expressing unutterable happiness.

"I have good news for you, sir," said the governor to Germain; "justice
has declared that no prosecution can be instituted against you; and in
consequence of the withdrawing of this, and explanations that have taken
place, I have received an order to set you at liberty immediately."

"Sir! What do you say? Can it be possible?"

Rigolette tried to speak, but her extreme emotion prevented her, and she
could only make an affirmative sign to Germain with her head, and clasp
her hands.

"Mademoiselle arrived a few minutes after I had received the order to
set you at liberty," added the governor. "A very powerful letter of
recommendation which she brought to me informed me of the touching
devotion she had shown to you in prison; and it is with extreme pleasure
that I sent for you, certain that you will be very happy to offer your
arm to mademoiselle, and lead her hence."

"A dream! It must be a dream!" said Germain. "Ah, sir, how can I thank
you? Excuse my astonishment,--joy prevents me from thanking you as I
ought."

"And I, too, M. Germain,--I cannot find a word to say," said Rigolette;
"only imagine my delight when I left you on finding the friend of M.
Rodolph, who was waiting for me."

"Again M. Rodolph!" exclaimed Germain, astonished.

"Yes, and M. Murphy said to me, 'Germain is free--here is a letter for
the governor of the prison; when you arrive there he will have received
the order for Germain's release, and you may take him away with you.' I
could not believe what I heard, and yet it was true. Well, as quick as
possible, I took a hackney-coach, and came here; it is waiting for us at
the gate."

We will not attempt to paint the delight of the two lovers when they
quitted La Force, and the evening they passed together in Rigolette's
small apartment, which Germain quitted at eleven o'clock to go to a
humble furnished room.


END OF VOLUME V.


       *       *       *       *       *
Transcriber's Notes:


This e-text was prepared from numbered edition 505 of the 1000 printed.

Minor punctuation and capitalization corrections have been made without
comment.

Minor typographical errors of single words, otherwise spelled correctly
throughout the text have been made without comment.

Word Variations appearing in the original text which have been retained:

"pocket-book" (1) and "pocketbook" (3)
"protégé" (2) and "protégée" (3)

Words using the [oe] ligature, which have been herein represented as
"oe": "Croesus."

Throughout the text, illustrations and their captions were placed on
facing pages. For the purpose of this e-text these pages have been
combined into one entry.

Footnotes, originally at the bottom of a printed page, have been placed
directly below the paragraph in which their anchor symbol appears.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Mysteries of Paris, Volume 5 of 6, by
Eugène Sue

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MYSTERIES OF PARIS, V.5 ***

***** This file should be named 33804-8.txt or 33804-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/3/8/0/33804/

Produced by David Edwards, Christine Aldridge and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
(Stanford University, SUL Books in the Public Domain)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

Project Gutenberg's The Mysteries of Paris, Volume 6 of 6, by Eugène Sue

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Mysteries of Paris, Volume 6 of 6

Author: Eugène Sue

Illustrators: G. Mercier
              Bicknell
              Léon Poiteau
              Adrian Marcel

Release Date: September 22, 2010 [EBook #33805]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MYSTERIES OF PARIS, V.6 ***




Produced by David Edwards, Christine Aldridge and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
(Stanford University, SUL Books in the Public Domain)





Transcriber's Notes:

1. Passages in italics are surrounded by _underscores_.

2. Passages in Gothic Bold are surrounded by +plus+ signs.

3. Other transcription notes appear at the end of this e-text.




[Illustration: "_Kneeling Down, Placed It on the Ground_"
Original Etching by Mercier]




+The Mysteries of Paris.+

  _ILLUSTRATED WITH ETCHINGS
  BY MERCIER, BICKNELL, POITEAU,
  AND ADRIAN MARCEL._

                 _BY EUGENE SUE_


      _IN SIX VOLUMES
         VOLUME VI._


       _PRINTED FOR
  FRANCIS A. NICCOLLS & CO.
          BOSTON_


     +Edition de Luxe+

_This edition is limited to one thousand copies,
of which this is_

          No.____




CONTENTS.


      CHAPTER                                             PAGE
         I. PUNISHMENT                                      11
        II. RODOLPH AND SARAH                               44
       III. LOVE'S FRENZY                                   68
        IV. THE HOSPITAL                                    80
         V. HOPE                                           108
        VI. THE FATHER AND DAUGHTER                        122
       VII. THE MARRIAGE                                   141
      VIII. BICÊTRE                                        152
        IX. THE TOILET                                     183
         X. MARTIAL AND THE CHOURINEUR                     195
        XI. THE FINGER OF PROVIDENCE                       201


      EPILOGUE.

         I. GEROLSTEIN                                     215
        II. THE PRINCESS AMELIE                            236
       III. THE VOWS                                       262
        IV. THE THIRTEENTH OF JANUARY                      267




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.

                                                          PAGE
      "KNEELING DOWN PLACED IT ON THE GROUND"   _Frontispiece_
      "WAS LOOKING AT HERSELF IN A MIRROR"                  44
      "THEY TOOK HER TO THEIR GUILTY HAUNTS"                65
      "THE SCHOOLMASTER WAS SITTING ON A BENCH"            172
      "IN THE CHURCH IN PRAYER"                            264




THE MYSTERIES OF PARIS.




CHAPTER I.

PUNISHMENT.


We will again conduct the reader into the study of Jacques Ferrand.
Availing ourselves of the loquacity of the clerks, we shall endeavour,
through their instrumentality, to narrate the events that had occurred
since the disappearance of Cecily.

"A hundred sous to ten, if his present state continues, that in less
than a month our governor will go off with a pop."

"The fact is, since Cecily left, he is only skin and bones."

"And now he takes to the priests again more than ever."

"The curé of the parish is a most respectable man, and I overheard him
say yesterday, to another priest who accompanied him, 'It is admirable!
M. Jacques Ferrand is the personification of charity.'"

"Well, then, when the curé declares a thing one must credit it; and yet
to believe that the governor is charitable is almost beyond my belief."

"Remember the forty sous for our breakfast."

"Yes, but then the head clerk says that three days ago the governor
realised a large sum in the funds, and that he is about to sell his
business."

"Well, no doubt he has the means to retire."

"He has speculated on the Bourse, and gained lots of money."

"What astonishes me is this friend who follows him like his shadow."

"Yes, he does not leave M. Ferrand for a moment; they eat together, and
seem as if they were inseparable."

"It seems to me as if I had seen this intruder somewhere!"

"Have you not remarked that every two hours there comes a man with large
light moustaches, with a military air, who inquires for the intruder of
the porter? This friend then goes down-stairs, discourses for a moment
with the hero with moustaches, after which the military gent turns on
his heel, goes away, and returns two hours afterwards."

"Yes, I have remarked it. It appears to me that, as I go and come, I see
in the street men who appear to be watching the house."

"Perhaps the head clerk knows more of this than we do. By the way, where
is he?"

"At the house of the Countess Macgregor, who has been assassinated, and
is now despaired of. They sent for the governor to-day, but the head
clerk was despatched in his stead."

"He has plenty in his hands, then, for I suppose he will fill Germain's
place as cashier."

"Talking of Germain, an odd thing has occurred. The governor, in order
to free him from prison, has declared that he made a mistake in his
accounts, and that he has found the money he accused Germain of taking."

"I do not see anything odd in that,--it is but justice. I was sure that
Germain was incapable of theft."

"Ah, here's a coach, gents!" said Chalamel, looking out of the window;
"it is not a spicy turn-out like that of the famous vicomte, the gay
Saint-Remy, but a hack concern."

"Who is coming out of it?"

"Only the curé,--a very worthy man he is, too."

"Silence! Some one comes in! To your work, my boys!"

And all the clerks, leaning over their desks, began to scrawl away with
much apparent industry, and as if their attention had not been taken off
their business for a single instant.

The pale features of the priest expressed at once a gentle melancholy
combined with an air of intelligence and venerable serenity. A small
black cap covered the crown of his head, while his long gray locks hung
down over the collar of his greatcoat. Let us merely add to this hasty
sketch, that owing to the worthy priest's implicit confidence in the
words and actions of others, he was, and ever had been, completely
blinded by the deep and well-practised hypocrisy of Jacques Ferrand.

"Is your worthy employer in his room, my children?" inquired the curé.

"Yes, M. l'Abbé, he is," answered Chalamel, as, rising respectfully, he
opened the door of an adjoining study, and waited for the priest to
enter.

Hearing loud voices in the apartment, and unwilling to overhear words
not intended for his ears, the abbé walked rapidly forwards, and tapped
briskly at the door.

"Come in," said a voice with a strong Italian accent; and, entering, the
priest found himself in the presence of Polidori and Jacques Ferrand.

The clerks did not appear to have erred in calculating upon the
approaching end of their employer. He was, indeed, scarcely to be
recognised. Spite of the almost spectral thinness and pallor of his
sharpened features, a deep red fever-spot burned and scorched upon his
projecting cheek-bones; a sort of incessant tremor, amounting
occasionally to convulsive spasms and starts, shook his attenuated
frame. His coarse but wasted hands seemed parched with feverish heat,
while his bloodshot eyes were shrouded from view by the large green
glasses he wore. Altogether his face was a fearful index of the internal
ravages of a fast consuming disease.

The physiognomy of Polidori offered a strong contrast to that of the
notary. Nothing could express a more bitter irony, a more biting
contempt, than the features of this hardened villain, surrounded as they
were by a mass of red hair, slightly mingled with gray, hanging in wild
disorder over his pale, wrinkled brow, and partially hiding his sharp,
penetrating eyes, which, green and transparent as the stone known as the
_aqua marine_, were placed very close to his hooked nose, and imparted a
still more sinister character to the look of sarcastic malevolence that
dwelt on his thin, compressed lips. Such was Polidori, as, attired in a
suit of entire black, he sat beside the desk of Jacques Ferrand. At the
sight of the priest both rose.

"And how do you find yourself, my good M. Ferrand?" inquired the abbé,
in a tone of deep solicitude; "let me hope you are better."

"Much the same as you last saw me, M. l'Abbé," replied the notary. "No
sleep, no rest, and constantly devoured by fever; but God's will be
done!"

"Alas, M. l'Abbé!" interposed Polidori, "my poor friend is no better;
but what a blessed spirit he is in! What resignation! Finding no other
relief from his suffering than in doing good!"

"Have the goodness to cease these praises, which I am far from
meriting," said the notary, in a short, dry tone, as though struggling
hard to restrain his feelings of rage and resentment; "to the Lord alone
belongs the right of judging what is good and what evil,--I am but a
miserable sinner!"

"We are all sinners," replied the abbé, mildly; "but all have not the
extreme charity by which you are distinguished, my worthy friend. Few,
indeed, like you, are capable of weaning their affections from their
earthly goods, that they may be employed only as a means of leading a
more Christianlike life. Are you still determined upon retiring from
your profession, the better to devote yourself to religious duties?"

"I disposed of my practice a day or two ago, for a large and handsome
sum. This money, united with other property, will enable me to found the
institution I was speaking to you of, and of which I have entirely
sketched out the plan. I am about to lay it before you, and to ask your
assistance in improving it where necessary."

"My noble-minded friend," exclaimed the abbé, with the deepest and
holiest admiration, "how naturally and unostentatiously you do these
things! Ah, well might I say there were but few who resembled you; and
upon the heads of such too many blessings can scarcely be prayed for and
wished."

"Few persons, like my friend Jacques here," said Polidori, with an
ironical smile, which wholly escaped the abbé, "are fortunate enough to
possess both piety and riches, charity and discrimination as to the
right channel into which to pour their wealth, in order that it may work
well for the good of their soul."

At this repetition of sarcastic eulogium, the notary's hand became
clenched with internal emotion, while, through his spectacles, he darted
a look of deadly hatred on Polidori.

"Do you perceive, M. l'Abbé," said the dear friend of Jacques Ferrand,
hastily, "he has these convulsive twitchings of the limbs
continually?--and yet he will not have any advice. He really makes me
quite wretched to see him, as it were, killing himself! Nay, my
excellent friend, spite of those displeased looks, I will persist in
declaring, in the presence of M. l'Abbé, that you are destroying
yourself by refusing all succour as you do."

As Polidori uttered these words, a convulsive shudder shook the
notary's whole frame; but in another instant he had regained the mastery
over himself, and was calm as before. A less simple-minded man than the
abbé might have perceived, both during this conversation and in that
which followed, a something unnatural in the language and forced actions
of Jacques Ferrand, for it is scarcely necessary to state that his
present proceedings were dictated to him by a will and authority he was
powerless to resist, and that it was by the command of Rodolph the
wretched man was compelled to adopt words and conduct diametrically the
reverse of his own sentiments or inclinations. And so it was that, when
sore pressed, the notary seemed half inclined to resist the arbitrary
and invisible power he found himself obliged to obey. But a glance at
Polidori soon put an end to his indecision, and, restraining all his
rage and impotent fury, Jacques Ferrand forbore any further
manifestation of futile rage, and bent beneath the yoke he could neither
shake off nor break.

"Alas, M. l'Abbé!" resumed Polidori, as though taking an infernal
pleasure in thus torturing the miserable notary, "my poor friend wholly
neglects his health. Let me entreat of you to join your request to mine,
that he will be more careful of his precious self, if not for himself or
his friends, at least for the sake of the poor and needy, whose hope and
support he is."

"Enough! Enough!" murmured the notary, in a deep, guttural voice.

"No," said the priest, much moved, "'tis not enough! You can never be
reminded too frequently that you belong not to yourself, and that you
are to blame for neglecting your health. During the ten years I have
known you I cannot recollect your ever being ill before the present
time, but really the last month has so changed you that you are scarcely
like the same person. And I am the more struck with the alteration in
your appearance, since for some little time I have not seen you. You
may recollect that when you sent for me the other day, I could not
conceal my surprise on finding you so changed; during the short space of
time that has elapsed since that visit, I find you even more rapidly
altered for the worse. You are visibly wasting away, and occasion us all
very serious uneasiness. I therefore most earnestly entreat of you to
consider and attend to your health."

"Believe me, M. l'Abbé, I feel most grateful for the kind interest you
express, but that I cannot bring myself to believe my situation as
dangerous as you do."

"Nay," said Polidori, "since you are thus obstinate, M. l'Abbé shall
know all. He greatly loves, esteems, and honours you; but how will those
feelings be increased when he learns the real cause of your languishing
condition, with the fresh claims your additional merits give you to his
regard and veneration!"

"M. l'Abbé," said the notary, impatiently, "I sent to beg your company
that I might confer with you on a matter of importance, and not to take
up your time in listening to the absurd and exaggerated eulogiums of my
friend!"

"You know, Jacques," said Polidori, fixing a piercing glance of fearful
meaning on the notary, "that it is useless attempting to escape from me,
and that you must hear all I have got to say."

The person so addressed cast down his eyes, and durst not reply.
Polidori continued:

"You may probably have remarked, M. l'Abbé, that the first symptoms of
our friend's illness manifested themselves in a sort of nervous attack,
which followed the abominable scandal raised by the affair of Louise
Morel, while in his service."

A sort of aguish shivering ran over the notary.

"Is it possible that you, sir, are acquainted with that unfortunate
girl's story?" inquired the priest, greatly astonished. "I imagined you
had only been in Paris a few days."

"And you were correctly informed; but my good friend Jacques told me all
about it, as a man would relate such a circumstance to his friend and
physician, since he attributed the nervous shock under which he is now
labouring to the excessive indignation awakened in his mind by the
discovery of his servant's crime. But that is not all. My poor friend's
sympathies have been still more painfully awakened by a fresh blow,
which, as you perceive, has had a very serious effect on his health. An
old and faithful servant, attached to him by many years of well-requited
service--"

"You allude to the untimely end of Madame Séraphin, I presume," said the
curé, interrupting Polidori. "I heard of the melancholy affair; she was
drowned, I believe, from some carelessness or imprudence manifested by
her while making one in a party of pleasure. I can quite understand the
distress such a circumstance must have occasioned M. Ferrand, whose kind
heart would be unable to forget that she who was thus snatched from life
had, for ten long years, been his faithful, zealous domestic; far from
blaming such regrets, I think them but natural, and reflecting as much
honour on the survivor as the deceased."

"M. l'Abbé," said the notary, "let me beseech of you to cease commending
my virtues; you confuse--you make me really uncomfortable."

"And who, then, shall speak of them as they deserve?" asked Polidori,
with feigned affection. "Will you? Oh, no! But, M. l'Abbé, you shall
have a fresh opportunity of praising him as he deserves. Listen! You
are, perhaps, ignorant that Jacques took a third servant, to replace
Louise Morel and Madame Séraphin? If you are not aware of that fact, you
have still to learn all his goodness towards poor Cecily; for that was
the name of the new domestic, M. l'Abbé."

Involuntarily the notary sprung from his seat, and with eyes glaring
with rage and madness, even in spite of the glasses he wore, he cried,
while a deep, fiery glow overspread his before livid countenance:

"Silence! I command! I insist! I forbid another word on this subject!"

"Come, come!" said the abbé, soothingly, "compose yourself. It seems
there is still some generous action I have not yet been told of. I
really must plead guilty to admiring the candour of your friend, however
his love of truth may offend your modesty. I was not acquainted with the
servant you alluded to, as, unfortunately, just about the time she
entered the service of our worthy M. Ferrand, he became so overwhelmed
with cares and business as to be obliged temporarily to interrupt our
frequent friendly meetings."

"That was merely a pretext to conceal the fresh act of goodness he
meditated, M. l'Abbé, and, at the risk of paining his modesty, I am
determined you shall know all about it," said Polidori, with a malignant
smile, while Jacques Ferrand, in mute rage, leaned his elbows on his
desk, while he concealed his face with his hands. "Imagine, then, M.
l'Abbé," resumed Polidori, feigning to address himself to the curé, but
at each phrase contriving to direct an ironical glance towards Jacques
Ferrand, "imagine that my kind-hearted friend here found his new
domestic possessed of the purest and rarest qualifications, the most
perfect modesty, with the gentleness and piety of an angel; nor was this
all. The quick penetration of my friend Jacques soon discovered that the
female in question (who, by the way, was both young and beautiful) had
never been accustomed to a servant's life, and that, to the most austere
virtue, she added great and varied information, with first-rate talents,
which had received the highest cultivation."

"Indeed!" exclaimed the abbé, much interested in the recital. "I was
not aware of this. But what ails you, my good M. Ferrand? You seem ill
and disturbed!"

"A slight headache," answered the notary, wiping the cold, clammy drops
from his brow, for the restraint he imposed upon himself was most
severe,--"nothing more! It will soon pass off."

Polidori shrugged up his shoulders, smiled maliciously, and said:

"Observe, M. l'Abbé, that Jacques is always seized with the same
symptoms directly any of his good actions are brought forward. But never
mind,--I am determined that his light shall no longer be hid under a
bushel, and it is my firm intention to reveal all his hidden charities.
But first let me go on with the history of his generous exertions in
favour of Cecily, who, on her side, had quickly discovered the
excellency of Jacques's heart, and, when questioned by him touching the
past, she candidly confessed that, left a stranger and wholly destitute
in a foreign land, by the imprudence of her husband, she considered
herself particularly fortunate in being able to obtain a shelter under
so sanctified a roof as M. Ferrand's as a most singular interposition of
Providence. The sight of so much misfortune, united to so much heavenly
resignation, banished all hesitation from the mind of Jacques, and he
wrote to the birthplace of the unfortunate girl for further information
respecting her. The reply to his inquiries was most satisfactory, as
well as confirmatory of all the young person had previously stated.
Then, assured of rightly dispensing his benevolence, Jacques bestowed
the most paternal kindness on Cecily, whom he sent back to her own
country, with a sum of money to support her till better days should
dawn, or she be enabled to obtain some suitable employment. Now I will
not utter one word in Jacques's praise for doing all this,--let the
facts speak for themselves."

"Excellent! Most excellent!" exclaimed the deeply affected curé.

"M. l'Abbé," said Jacques Ferrand, in a hoarse and abrupt tone, "I do
not desire to take up your valuable time in discoursing of myself, but
of the project respecting which I requested your presence, and for the
furtherance of which I wished to obtain your valuable concurrence."

"I can well understand that the praises so justly bestowed on you by
your friend are painful to one of your extreme modesty; let us, then,
merely speak of your good works as though you were not the author of
them. But, first of all, let me give an account of my own proceedings in
the matters you confided to me. According to your desire, I have
deposited the sum of one hundred thousand crowns in the Bank of France,
in my own name, with the intention of employing that amount in the act
of restitution of which you are the medium, and which I am to effect.
You preferred the money being lodged in the bank, although, in my
opinion, it would have been in equal safety with you."

"And in so doing, M. l'Abbé, I only acted in concurrence with the wishes
of the person making this restitution for the sake of his conscience.
His request to me was to place the sum mentioned by you in your hands,
and to entreat of you to forward it to the widow lady, Madame Fermont,
whose maiden name was Renneville (the notary's voice trembled as he
pronounced these two names), whenever that person should present herself
to you. I fully substantiate her claims."

"Be assured," replied the priest, "I will with pleasure discharge the
trust committed to me."

"But that is not the only matter in which your assistance is solicited."

"So much the better, if the others resemble this, for, without seeking
the motives which dictate it, a voluntary restitution is always
calculated to excite a deep interest; these rigid decrees of an
awakened conscience are always the harbingers of a deep and sincere
repentance, and such an expiation cannot fail to bring forth good
fruits."

"True, M. l'Abbé, the soul must indeed be in a perilous state when such
a sum as one hundred thousand crowns is voluntarily refunded. For my
part, I confess to having felt more inquisitive on the subject than
yourself; but what chance had my curiosity against the firm and unshaken
discretion of my friend Jacques? I am, therefore, still in ignorance of
the name of the individual who thus restores such immense wealth for
their conscience' sake."

"But," continued Polidori, eyeing Jacques Ferrand with a keen,
significant glance, "you will hear to what an extent are carried the
generous scruples of the author of this restitution; and, to tell the
truth, I strongly suspect that our right-minded friend here was the
first to awaken the slumbering feelings of the guilty person, as well as
to point out the surest and fittest way of tranquillising them."

"How so?" inquired the priest.

"What do you mean?" asked the notary.

"Why, remember the Morels, those honest, deserving people."

"True, true!" interposed Jacques Ferrand, in a hasty tone, "I had
forgotten them."

"Imagine, M. l'Abbé, that the author of this restitution, doubtless
influenced by Jacques, not contented with the restitution of this large
sum, wishes also--But my worthy friend shall speak for himself--I will
not deprive him of the pleasure of relating so fine an action."

"Pray let me hear all about it, my dear M. Ferrand," said the priest.

"You are aware," replied Jacques Ferrand, with affected sympathy,
strangely mingled with the deep repugnance he entertained at being
compelled to play a part so opposite to his inclinations, and which
betrayed itself in the alteration his voice and manner exhibited, even
in spite of all his attempts to be on his guard,--"you are aware, I say,
M. l'Abbé, that the misconduct of that unhappy girl, Louise Morel, took
so deep an effect on her father as to deprive him of his senses, and to
reduce his numerous family to the very verge of destitution, thus bereft
of their sole support and prop. Happily Providence interposed in their
behalf, and the person whose voluntary restitution you have so kindly
undertaken to arrange, not satisfied with this step, believed his abuse
of confidence required still further expiation, and, therefore, inquired
of me if I knew any genuine case of real and unmerited distress. I
immediately thought of the Morel family, and recommended them so warmly
that the unknown personage begged me to hand over to you (as I shall do)
the necessary funds for purchasing an annuity of eighty pounds a year
for the joint lives of Morel, his wife, and children."

"Truly," said the abbé, "such conduct is beyond my poor praise. Most
gladly will I add this commission to the former; still permit me to
express my surprise that you were not yourself selected to arrange an
affair of this nature, the proceedings of which must be so much more
familiar to you than to me."

"The reason for your being preferred, M. l'Abbé, was because the
individual in question believed that his expiatory acts would go forth
even in greater sanctity if they passed through hands as pure and pious
as your own."

"Then be it so! And I will at once proceed to arrange for an annuity to
Morel, the worthy but unfortunate parent of Louise. Still I am inclined
to think, with your friend, that you are not altogether a stranger to
the motives which dictated this additional expiation."

"Nay, M. l'Abbé, let me beg of you to believe that all I did was to
recommend the Morel family as a deserving case upon which to exercise
charitable sympathy; I had no further share in the good work," said
Jacques Ferrand.

"Now, then," said Polidori, "you are next to be gratified, M. l'Abbé,
with seeing to what an extent my worthy friend there has carried his
philanthropic views, as manifested in the foundation of such an
establishment as that we have already discussed. He will read to you the
plan definitely decided on. The necessary money for its endowment is
ready, and all is prepared for immediate action; but since yesterday a
doubt has crossed his mind, and if he does not like to state it himself
I will do so for him."

"There is no occasion for your taking that trouble," said Jacques, who
seemed to find a relief in talking himself rather than be compelled to
sit in silence and listen to the ironical praises of his accomplice.
"The fact is this, M. l'Abbé, I have reflected upon our purposed
undertaking, and it occurs to me that it would be more in accordance
with a right spirit of humility and Christian meekness if the projected
establishment were instituted in your name, and not in mine."

"Nay, nay!" exclaimed the abbé, "such humility is exaggerated beyond all
reasonable scruples. You may fairly pride yourself upon having
originated so noble a charity, and it becomes your just right, as well
as your duty, to give it your own name."

"Pardon me for insisting in this instance on having my own way. I have
thought the matter well over, and am resolved upon preserving a strict
_incognito_ as to being the founder of the undertaking. I therefore
venture to hope you will do me the favour to act for me, and carry the
scheme into execution, selecting the various functionaries requisite for
its several departments. I merely desire to have the nomination of the
chief clerk and one of the doorkeepers. To this kindness you must add
the most inviolable secrecy as regards myself."

"Independently of the pleasure it would afford me to coöperate in such a
work as yours, my duty to my fellow creatures would not permit me to do
otherwise than accede to your wishes; you may therefore reckon upon me
in every way you desire."

"Then, with your permission, M. l'Abbé, my friend will read you the plan
he has decided on adopting."

"Perhaps," said Jacques Ferrand, bitterly, "you will spare me the
fatigue of reading it, by taking that office on yourself? You will
oblige me by so doing, will you not?"

"By no means!" answered Polidori. "The pure philanthropy which dictated
the scheme will sound far better from your lips than mine."

"Enough!" interrupted the notary; "I will read it myself."

Polidori, so long the accomplice of Jacques Ferrand, and consequently
well acquainted with the black catalogue of his crimes, could not
restrain a fiendish smile as he saw the notary compelled in his own
despite to read aloud and adopt as his own the words and sentiments so
arbitrarily dictated by Rodolph.

    "ESTABLISHMENT OF THE BANK FOR WORKMEN OUT OF EMPLOY.

    "We are instructed to 'Love one another!' These divine words
    contain the germ of all charities. They have inspired the humble
    founder of this institution. Limited as to the means of action,
    the founder has desired at least to enable as many as possible
    to participate in what he offers. In the first place, he
    addresses himself to the honest, hard-working workmen, burdened
    with families, whom the want of employment frequently reduces to
    the most cruel extremities. It is not a degrading alms which he
    offers to his brethren, but a gratuitous loan he begs them to
    accept. And he hopes that this loan may frequently prevent them
    from involving their future by distressing loans, which they are
    forced to make in order to await a return of work, their only
    resource for a family of whom they are the sole support. As a
    guarantee of this loan he only requires from his brethren an
    undertaking on honour, and a keeping of the word pledged. He
    invests a sum producing an annual income of twelve thousand
    francs, and to this amount loans of twenty to forty francs,
    without interest, will be advanced to married men out of work.
    These loans will only be made to workmen or workwomen with
    certificates of good conduct given by the last employer, who
    will mention the cause and date of the suspension from labour.
    These loans to be repaid monthly by one-sixths' or one-tenths',
    at the option of the borrower, beginning from the day when he
    again procures employment. He must sign a simple engagement, on
    his honour, to return the loan at the periods fixed. This
    engagement must be also signed by two fellow workmen as
    guarantees, in order to develop and extend by their conjunction
    the sacredness of the promise sworn to. The workman and his two
    sureties who do not return the sum borrowed must never again
    have another loan, having forfeited his sacred engagement, and,
    especially, having deprived so many of his brethren of the
    advantage he has enjoyed, as the sum he has not repaid is for
    ever lost to the Bank for the Poor. The sums lent being, on the
    contrary, scrupulously repaid, the loans will augment from year
    to year. Not to degrade man by a loan, not to encourage idleness
    by an unprofitable gift, to increase the sentiments of honour
    and probity natural to the labouring classes, to come paternally
    to the aid of the workman, who, already living with difficulty
    from day to day, owing to the insufficiency of wages, cannot,
    when work stops, suspend the wants of himself and family because
    his labour is suspended,--these are the thoughts which have
    presided over this institution. May His Holy Name who has said
    'Love one another!' be alone glorified!"

"Ah, sir," exclaimed the abbé, "what a charitable idea! Now I understand
your emotion on reading these lines of such touching simplicity."

In truth, as he concluded the reading, the voice of Jacques Ferrand had
faltered, his patience and courage were at an end; but, watched by
Polidori, he dared not infringe Rodolph's slightest order.

"M. l'Abbé, is not Jacques's idea excellent?" asked Polidori.

"Ah, sir, I, who know all the wretchedness of the city, can more easily
comprehend of what importance may be for poor workmen out of employ a
loan which may seem so trifling to the happy in this world! Ah, what
good may be done if persons but knew that with thirty or forty francs,
which would be scrupulously repaid, if without interest, they might
often save the future, and sometimes the honour of a family, whom the
want of work places in the grasp of misery and want!"

"Jacques values your praises, Monsieur l'Abbé," replied Polidori. "And
you will have still more to say to him when you hear of his institution
of a gratuitous Mont-de-Piété (pawnbroking establishment), for Jacques
has not forgotten this, but made it an adjunct to his Bank for the
Poor."

"Can it be true?" exclaimed the priest, clasping his hands in
admiration.

The notary contrived to read with a rapid voice the other details, which
referred to loans to workmen whose labour was suspended by fatigue or
illness, and his intention to establish a Bank for the Poor producing
twenty-five thousand francs a year for advances on pledges, which were
never to go beyond ten francs for each pledge, without any charges for
interest. The management and office of the loans in the Bank for the
Poor was to be in the Rue du Temple, Number 17, in a house bought for
the purpose. An income of ten thousand francs a year was to be devoted
to the costs and management of the Bank for the Poor, whose manager was
to be--

Polidori here interrupted the notary, and said to the priest:

"You will see, sir, by the choice of the manager, that Jacques knows how
to repair an involuntary error. You know that by a mistake, which he
deeply deplores, he had falsely accused his cashier of embezzling a sum
which he afterwards found. Well, it is this honest fellow, François
Germain by name, that Jacques has named as manager of the institution,
with four thousand francs a year salary. Is it not admirable, Monsieur
l'Abbé?"

"Nothing now can astonish me, or rather nothing ever astonished me so
much before," the priest replied; "the fervent piety, the virtues of our
worthy friend, could only have such a result sooner or later. To devote
his whole fortune to so admirable an institution is most excellent!"

"More than a million of francs (40,000_l._), M. l'Abbé," said Polidori;
"more than a million, amassed by order, economy, and probity! And there
were so many wretches who accused Jacques of avarice! By what they said,
his business brings him in fifty or sixty thousand francs a year, and
yet he leads a life of privations!"

"To that I would reply," said the abbé, with enthusiasm, "that during
fifteen years he lived like a beggar, in order one day to console those
in distress most gloriously."

"But be at least proud and joyful at the good you do," cried Polidori,
addressing Jacques Ferrand, who, gloomy, beaten, and with his eye fixed,
seemed absorbed in painful meditation.

"Alas!" said the abbé, in a tone of sorrow, "it is not in this world
that one receives the recompense of so many virtues! There is a higher
ambition."

"Jacques," said Polidori, lightly touching the notary's shoulder,
"finish reading your prospectus."

The notary started, passed his hand across his forehead, and addressing
himself to the priest, "Your pardon, M. l'Abbé," said he, "but I was
lost in thought; I felt myself involuntarily carried away by the idea of
how immensely the funds of this 'Bank for the Poor' might be augmented
if the sums lent out were, when repaid, allowed to accumulate only for a
year. At the end of four years, the institution would be in a condition
to afford loans, either wholly gratuitously, or upon security, to the
amount of fifty thousand crowns! Enormous! And I am delighted to find it
so," continued he, as he reflected, with concealed rage, on the value of
the sacrifice he was compelled to make. He then added, "A revenue of ten
thousand francs will be secured for the expenses and management of the
'Bank for unemployed Workmen,' whose perpetual director shall be
François Germain; and the housekeeper, the present porter in the place,
an individual named Pipelet. M. l'Abbé Dumont, in whose hands the
necessary funds for carrying out the undertaking will be placed, will
establish a board of superintendence, composed of the magistrate of the
district and other legal functionaries, in addition to all such
influential personages whose patronage and support may be likely to
advance the interests of the 'Poor Man's Bank;' for the founder would
esteem himself more than paid for the little he has done, should his
example induce other charitable persons to come forward in aid of his
work."

"The opening of 'the bank' will be duly announced by every channel
calculated to give publicity."

"In conclusion, the founder has only to disclaim any desire to attract
notoriety or draw down applause, his sole motive being an earnest wish
to reëcho the divine precept of 'Love ye one another!'"

The notary had now concluded; and without making any reply to the
congratulations of the abbé, he proceeded to furnish him with the cash
and notes requisite for the very considerable outlay required in
carrying out the institution just described, and purchasing the annuity
for Morel; after which he said, "Let me hope, M. l'Abbé, that you will
not refuse the fresh mission confided to your charity. There is, indeed,
a stranger, one Sir Walter Murphy, who has given me the benefit of his
advice in drawing up the plan I have lately read to you, who will in
some degree relieve you of the entire burden of this affair; and this
very day he purposes conversing with you on the best means of bringing
our schemes to bear, as well as to place himself at your disposal
whenever he can render you the slightest service. To him you may speak
freely and without any reserve, but to all others I pray of you to
preserve the strictest secrecy as regards myself."

"You may rely on me. But you are surely ill! Tell me, my excellent
friend, is it bodily or mental pain that thus blanches your cheek? Are
you ill?"

"Somewhat indisposed, M. l'Abbé; the fatigue of reading that long paper,
added to the emotions called up by your gratifying praises, have
combined to overcome me; and, indeed, I have been a great sufferer
during the last few days. Pray excuse me," said Jacques Ferrand, as he
threw himself back languidly in his chair; "I do not apprehend any
serious consequences from my present weakness, but must own I do feel
quite exhausted."

"Perhaps," said the priest, kindly, "your best plan would be to retire
to bed, and allow your physician to see you."

"I am a physician, M. l'Abbé," said Polidori; "the condition of my
friend Jacques requires the greatest care, and I shall immediately do my
best to relieve his present symptoms."

The notary shuddered.

"Well, well," said the curé, "let us hope that a little rest is all you
require to set you to rights! I will now take my leave; but first let me
give you an acknowledgment for the money I have received."

While the priest was writing the receipt, a look wholly impossible to
describe passed between Jacques Ferrand and Polidori.

"Come, come," said the priest, as he handed the paper he had written to
Jacques Ferrand, "be of good cheer! Depend upon it, it will be long ere
so faithful and devout a servant is suffered to quit a life so usefully
and religiously employed. I will come again to-morrow, and inquire how
you are. Adieu, monsieur! Farewell, my good, my holy, and excellent
friend!"

And with these words the priest quitted the apartment, leaving Jacques
Ferrand and Polidori alone there. No sooner was the door closed than a
fearful imprecation burst from the lips of Jacques Ferrand, whose rage
and despair, so long and forcibly repressed, now broke forth with
redoubled fury. Breathless and excited, he continued, with wild and
haggard looks, to pace to and fro like a furious tiger going the length
of his chain, and then again retracing his infuriated march; while
Polidori, preserving the most imperturbable look and manner, gazed on
him with insulting calmness.

"Damnation!" exclaimed Jacques Ferrand, at last, in a voice of
concentrated wrath and violence; "the idea of my fortune being thus
swallowed up in founding these humbugging philanthropic institutions,
and to be obliged to give away my riches in such absurdities as building
banks for other people! Your master must be the fiend himself to torture
a man as he is doing me!"

"I have no master," replied Polidori, coldly; "only, like yourself, I
have a judge whose decrees there is no escaping!"

"But thus blindly and idiotically to follow the most trifling order of
this man!" continued Jacques Ferrand, with redoubled rage. "To compel
me, constrain me, to the very actions most galling and hateful to me!"

"Nay, you have your chance between obedience and the scaffold!"

"And to think that there should be no way to escape this accursed
domination! To be obliged to part with such a sum as that I lately
handed over to that old proser,--a million sterling! The very extent of
all my earthly possessions are now this house and about one hundred
thousand francs. What more can he want with me?"

"Oh, but you have not done yet! The prince has learned, through Badinot,
that your man of straw, 'Petit Jean,' was only your own assumed title,
under which you made so many usurious loans to the Count de Remy, whom
you so roughly took to task for his forgeries. The sums repaid by
Saint-Remy were supplied him by a lady of high rank; and you may, very
probably, be called upon to make a second restitution in that case, as
well as the former; however, you may escape that in consequence of the
fear entertained of wounding the delicacy of the noble lender, were the
facts brought before the public."

"And fixed, chained here!"

"As firmly as though bound by an iron cable!"

"With such a wretch as you for my gaoler!"

"Why, it is the prince's system to punish crime by crime,--the guilty by
the hand of his accomplice. So how can you object to me?"

"Oh, rage!"

"But, unhappily, powerless rage; for until he sends me his orders to
permit you to leave this house, I shall follow you like your shadow! I,
like yourself, have placed my head in danger of falling on the scaffold;
and should I fail to perform my prescribed task of gaoler, there it
would quickly fall. So that, you perceive, my integrity as your keeper
is necessarily incorruptible. And as for our both attempting to free
ourselves by flight, that is wholly impossible. Not a step could we take
without immediately falling into the hands of those who, day and night,
keep vigilant watch around and at each door of this house."

"Death and fury! I know it."

"Then resign yourself to what is inevitable; for if even flight were
practicable, what would it do for our ultimate safety? We should be
hunted down by the officers of justice, and speedily overtaken, with
certain death before us; while, on the contrary, by your submitting and
my superintending your obedience, we are quite sure to keep our heads on
our shoulders."

"Do not exasperate me by this cool irony, or--"

"Well, go on--or what? Oh, bless you, I am not afraid of you or your
anger; but I know you too well not to adopt every precaution. I am well
armed, I can tell you; and though you may have possessed yourself of the
celebrated poisoned stiletto carried by Cecily, it would not be worth
your while to try its power on me. You are aware that I am obliged,
every two hours, to send to him who has a right to demand it a bulletin
of your precious health! Should I not present myself with the required
document, murder would be suspected, and you be taken into custody. But
I wrong you in supposing you capable of such a crime. Is it likely that,
after sacrificing more than a million of money to save your life, you
would place it in danger for the poor satisfaction of avenging yourself
on me by taking my life? No, no! You are not quite such a fool as that,
at any rate!"

"Oh, misery, misery! Endless and inextricable! Whichever way I turn, I
see nothing but death or disgrace! My curse be on you--on all mankind!"

"Your misanthropy, then, exceeds your philanthropy; for while the former
embraces the whole world, the latter merely relates to a small part of
Paris."

"Go on, go on, monster! Mock as you will!"

"Would you rather I should overwhelm you with reproaches? Whose fault is
it but yours that we are placed in our present position? Why would you
persist in hanging to that letter of mine relative to the murder I
assisted you in, which gained you one hundred thousand crowns, although
you contrived to make it appear the man had fallen by his own hand? Why,
I say, did you keep that letter of mine suspended around your neck, as
though it had been a holy relic, instead of the confession of a crime?"

"Why, you contemptible being! Why, because having handed over to you
fifty thousand francs for your share and assistance in the deed, I
exacted from you that letter containing an admission of your
participation in the affair, in order that I might have that security
for your playing me fair; for with that document in existence, to betray
me would have been to denounce yourself. That letter was the security,
both for my life and fortune. Now are you answered as to my reasons for
keeping it so carefully about me?"

"I see! It was skilfully devised on your part, for by betraying you I
gained nothing but the certainty of perishing with you on the same
scaffold; and yet your cleverness has ruined us, while mine has assured
our safety, up to the present moment."

"Great safety, certainly, if our present situation is taken into
consideration!"

"Who could foresee the turn things have taken? But according to the
ordinary course of events, our crime would have remained for ever under
the same veil of concealment my management had thrown over it."

"Your management?"

"Even so! Why, do you not recollect that, after we had killed the man,
you were for merely counterfeiting his writing, in order to despatch a
letter as if from himself to his sister, stating his intention of
committing suicide in consequence of having utterly ruined himself by
losses at play? You believed it a great stroke of policy not to make any
mention, in this letter, of the money entrusted to your charge. This was
absurd because the sister, being aware of the deposit left in your
hands, would be sure to claim it; it was wiser to take the contrary
path, and make mention, as we did, of the money deposited with you; so
that, should any suspicions arise as to the manner in which the murdered
man met his death, you would be the very last on whom suspicion could
fall; for how could it be supposed for an instant that you would first
kill a man to obtain possession of the treasure placed under your care,
and then write to inform the sister of the fact of the money having been
lodged with you? And what was the consequence of this skilful suggestion
on my part? Every one believed the dead man had destroyed himself. Your
high reputation for probity enabled you successfully to deny the
circumstance of any such sum of money as that claimed ever having been
placed in your hands; and the general impression was, that the
unprincipled brother had first dissipated his sister's fortune, and then
committed suicide."

"But what does all this matter now, since the crime is discovered?"

"And who is to be thanked for its discovery? Is it my fault if my letter
has become a sort of two-edged sword? Why were you so weak, so silly, as
to surrender so formidable a weapon to--that infernal Cecily?"

"Silence!" exclaimed Jacques Ferrand, with a fearful expression of
countenance; "name her not!"

"With all my heart! I don't want to bring on an attack of epilepsy. You
see plainly enough that, as regards the common course of ordinary
justice, our mutual precautions were quite sufficient to ensure our
safety; but he who now holds us in his formidable power goes to work
differently; he believes that cutting off the heads of criminals is not
a sufficient reparation for the wrongs they have done. With the proofs
he has against us, he might give you and myself up to the laws of our
country; but what would be got by that? Merely a couple of dead bodies,
to help to enrich the churchyard."

"True, true! This prince, devil, or demon--whichever he is--requires
tears, groans, wringings of the heart, ere he is satisfied. And yet 'tis
strange he should work so much woe for me, who know him not, neither
have ever done him the least harm. Why, then, is he so bitter against
me?"

"In the first place, because he professes to sympathise with the
sufferings of other men, whom he calls, simply enough, his brethren;
and, secondly, because he knows those you have injured, and he punishes
you according to his ideas."

"But what right has he to exercise any such power over me?"

"Why, look you, Jacques! Between ourselves it is not worth while to
question the right of a man who might legally consign us to a scaffold.
But what would be the result? Your two only relations are both dead;
consequently government would profit by your wealth, to the injury of
those you have wronged. On the other hand, by making your fortune the
price of your life, Morel (the father of the unhappy girl you
dishonoured), with his numerous family, may be placed beyond the reach
of want; Madame de Fermont, the sister of the pretended self-murderer,
Renneville, will get back her one hundred thousand crowns; Germain,
falsely accused by you of robbery, will be reinstated in life, and
placed at the head of the 'Bank for distressed Workmen,' which you are
compelled to found and endow as an expiation for your many offences
against society. And, candidly looking at the thing in the same point of
view as he who now holds us in his clutches, it must be owned that,
though mankind would have gained nothing by your death, they will be
considerably advantaged by your life."

"And this it is excites my rage, that forms my greatest torture!"

"The prince knows that as well as you do. And what is he going to do
with us, after all? I know not. He promised us our lives, if we would
blindly comply with all his orders; but if he should not consider our
past offences sufficiently expiated, he will find means to make death
itself preferable a thousand times to the existence he grants us. You
don't know him. When he believes himself called upon to be stern, no
executioner can be more inexorable and unpitying to the criminal his
hand must deprive of life. He must have had some fiend at his elbow, to
discover what I went into Normandy for. However, he has more than one
demon at his command; for that Cecily, whom may the descending lightning
strike to the earth--"

"Again I say, silence! Name her not! Utter not the word Cecily!"

"I tell you I wish that every curse may light upon her! And have I not
good reason for hating one who has placed us in our present situation?
But for her, our heads would be safe on our shoulders, and likely to
remain so. To what has your besotted passion for that creature brought
us!"

Instead of breaking out into a fresh rage, Jacques Ferrand replied, with
the most extreme dejection, "Do you know the person you are speaking of?
Tell me, have you ever seen her?"

"Never; but I am aware she is reported to be very beautiful."

"Beautiful!" exclaimed the notary, emphatically; then, with an
expression of bitter despair, he added, "Cease to speak of that you know
not. What I did you would have done if similarly tempted."

"What, endanger my life for the love of a woman?"

"For such a one as Cecily; and I tell you candidly I would do the same
thing again, for the same hopes as then led me on."

"By all the devils in hell," cried Polidori, in utter amazement, "he is
bewitched!"

"Hearken to me," resumed the notary, in a low, calm tone, occasionally
rendered more energetic by the bursts of uncontrollable despair which
possessed his mind. "Listen! You know how much I love gold, as well as
all I have ventured to acquire it. To count over in my thoughts the
sums I possessed, to see them doubled by my avarice, to know myself
master of immense wealth, was at once my joy, my happiness; to possess,
not for the sake of expending or enjoying, but to hoard, to gloat over,
was my life, my delight. A month ago, had I been told to choose between
my fortune and my head, I should certainly have sacrificed the latter to
save the former."

"But what would be the use of possessing all this wealth, if you must
die?"

"The ecstasy of dying in the consciousness of its possession; to enjoy
till the last moment the dear delightful feeling of being the owner of
those riches for which you have braved everything, privations, disgrace,
infamy, the scaffold itself, to be able to say, even as you lay your
head on the fatal block,'Those vast treasures are mine!' Oh, death is
far sweeter than to endure the living agonies I suffer at seeing the
riches accumulated with so much pain, difficulties, and dangers torn
from me! Dreadful, dreadful! 'Tis not dying daily, but each minute in
the day; and this dreadful state of misery may be protracted for years!
Oh, how greatly should I prefer being struck down by that sudden and
rapid death that carries you off ere one fragment of your beloved riches
is taken from you! For still, with your dying breath, you might sigh
forth, 'Those treasures are mine,--all, all mine! None but me can or
dare approach them!'"

Polidori gazed on his accomplice with profound astonishment. "I do not
understand you," said he, at last; "if such be the case, why have you
obeyed the commands of him whose denunciation of you would bring you to
a scaffold? Why, if life be so horrible to you, have you chosen to
accept it at his hands, and pay the heavy price you are doing for it?"

"Because," answered the notary, in a voice that sunk so low as to be
scarcely audible, "because death brings
forgetfulness--annihilation--and then, too, Cecily--"

"What!" said Polidori, "do you still hope?"

"No," said the notary, "I possess--"

"What?"

"The fond impassioned remembrance of her."

"But what folly is this when you are sure never to see her more, and
when she has brought you to a scaffold!"

"That matters not; I love her even more ardently, more frantically than
ever!" exclaimed Jacques Ferrand, amid a torrent of sighs and sobs that
contrasted strongly with the previous gloomy dejection of his last
remark. "Yes," continued he, with fearful wildness, "I love her too well
to be willing to die, while I can feast my senses upon the recollection
only of that night--that memorable night in which I saw her so lovely,
so loving, so fascinating! Never is her image, as I then beheld her,
absent from my brain; waking or sleeping, she is ever before me, decked
in all the intoxicating beauty that was displayed to my impassioned
gaze! Still do her large, lustrous eyes seem to dart forth their fiery
glances, and I almost fancy I can feel her warm breath on my cheek,
while her clear, melodious voice seems ringing its full sounds into my
ear with promises of bliss, alas, never to be mine! Yet, though to live
thus is torturing--horrible--yet would I prefer it to the apathy, the
still nothingness of the grave. No, no, no; let me live, poor, wretched,
despised,--a branded galley-slave, if you will,--but give me yet the
means of doting in secret on the recollection of this wonderful being;
whether she be fiend or angel, yet does she engross my every thought!"

"Jacques," said Polidori, in a voice and manner contrasting strongly
with his habitual tone of cool, provoking sarcasm, "I have witnessed
almost every description of bodily and mental suffering, but certainly
nothing that equalled what you endure. He who holds us in his power
could not have devised more cruel torture than that you are compelled to
endure. You are condemned to live, to await death through a vista of
long, wasting torments, for your description of your feelings fully
explains to me the many alarming symptoms I have observed in you from
day to day, and of which I have hitherto vainly sought to find the
cause."

"But the symptoms you speak of as alarming are nothing but exhaustion, a
sort of reaction of the bodily and mental powers; do you not think so?
Tell me! I am not surely in any danger of dying?"

"There is no immediate danger, but your situation is precarious; and
there are some thoughts you must cease to dwell on--nay, banish from
your memory--or your danger is imminent."

"I will do whatever you bid me, so that my life be preserved,--for I
will not die. Oh, let priests talk of the sufferings of the damned, but
what are their tortures compared to mine? Tormented alike by passion and
avarice, I have two open wounds rankling in my heart, each occasioning
mortal agony. The loss of my fortune is dreadful, but the fear of death
is even still more so. I have desired to live; and though my existence
may probably be but one protracted scene of endless wretchedness, it is
preferable to death and annihilation; for it would be the termination of
my fatal happiness,--the power of recalling each word and look of
Cecily!"

"You have at least one vast consolation," said Polidori, resuming his
accustomed _sang-froid_, "in the recollection of the good actions by
which you have sought to expiate your crimes!"

"Rail on! Mock my misery! Turn me on the hot coals on which my ill
fortune has placed me! But you well know, mean and contemptible being
that you are, how I hate, how I loathe all mankind, and that these
forced expiations to which I am condemned only serve to increase my
detestation of those who compel me to make them, and those who profit by
them. By all that is sacred, it passes human malice to condemn me to
live in endless misery, such as would dismay the stoutest nature, while
my fellow creatures, as they are called, have all their griefs assuaged
at the cost of my dearly prized treasures! Oh, that priest who but now
quitted us, loading me with blessings while my heart seemed like one
vast ocean of fiery gall and bitterness against himself and all
mankind--oh, how I longed to plunge a dagger in his breast! 'Tis too
much--too much for endurance!" cried he, pressing his clenched hands to
his forehead; "my brain burns, my ideas become confused, I shall not be
able much longer to resist these violent attacks of impotent, futile
rage,--these unending tortures; and all through you, Cecily,--fatal,
adored Cecily! Will you ever know all the agonies I have borne on your
account, and will you still haunt me with that mocking smile? Cecily,
Cecily! Back to the fiends from whom you sprung, and drive me not to
destruction!"

All at once a hasty knock was heard at the door of the apartment.
Polidori immediately opened it, and perceived the principal clerk in the
notary's office, who, pale and much agitated, exclaimed, "I must speak
with M. Ferrand directly!"

"Hush!" answered Polidori, in a low tone, as he came forth from the room
and shut the door after him; "he is very ill just now, and cannot be
disturbed on any account."

"Then do you, sir, who are M. Ferrand's best and most intimate friend,
step forward to help and assist him; but come quickly, for there is not
an instant to be lost!"

"What has happened?"

"By M. Ferrand's orders, I went to-day to the house of the Countess
Macgregor, to say that he was unable to wait on her to-day, according to
her request. This lady, who seems quite out of danger at present, sent
for me to her chamber; when I went in, she exclaimed, in an angry,
threatening manner,'Go back to M. Ferrand, and say to him that if he is
not here in half an hour, or at least before the close of the day, he
shall be arrested for felony. The child he passed off as dead is still
living; I know into whose hands he gave her up, and I also know where
she is at this present minute.'"

"This lady must be out of her senses," cried Polidori, shrugging up his
shoulders. "Poor thing!"

"I should have thought so myself, but for the confident manner in which
the countess spoke."

"I have no doubt but that her illness has affected her head; and persons
labouring under any delusion are always impressed with the most perfect
conviction of the truth of their fancies."

"I ought also to state that, just as I was leaving the room, one of the
countess's female attendants entered all in a hurry, and said, 'His
highness will be here in an hour's time!'"

"You are sure you heard those words?" asked Polidori.

"Quite, quite sure, sir! And I remember it the more, because I
immediately began wondering in my own mind what highness she could
mean."

"It is quite clear," said Polidori, mentally, "she expects the prince;
but how comes that about? What strange course of events can have induced
him to visit one he ought never again to meet? I know not why, but I
greatly mistrust this renewal of intimacy. Our position, bad as it is,
may even be rendered still worse by it." Then, addressing himself to the
clerk, he added, "Depend upon it there is nothing of any consequence in
the message you have brought; 'tis merely the effects of a wandering
imagination on the part of the countess; but, to prevent your feeling
any uneasiness, I promise to acquaint M. Ferrand with it directly he is
well enough to converse upon any matter of business."

We shall now conduct the reader to the house of the Countess Sarah
Macgregor.




CHAPTER II.

RODOLPH AND SARAH.


A salutary crisis had occurred, which relieved the Countess Macgregor
from the delirium and suffering under which, for several days, her life
had been despaired of.

The day had begun to break when Sarah, seated in a large easy chair, and
supported by her brother, Thomas Seyton, was looking at herself in a
mirror which one of her woman on her knees held up before her. This was
in the apartment where La Chouette had made the attempt to murder.

The countess was as pale as marble, and her pallor made her dark eyes,
hair, and eyebrows even more striking; and she was attired in a
dressing-gown of white muslin. "Give me my bandeau of coral," she said
to one of her women, in a voice which, although weak, was imperious and
abrupt.

"Betty will fasten it on for you," said Seyton; "you will exhaust
yourself; you are already very imprudent."

"The bandeau,--the bandeau!" repeated Sarah, impatiently, who took this
jewel and arranged it on her brow. "Now fasten it, and leave me!" she
said to the women.

The instant they were retiring, she said, "Let M. Ferrand be shown into
the little blue salon." Then she added, with ill-dissembled pride, "As
soon as his royal highness the Grand Duke of Gerolstein comes, let him
be introduced instantly to this apartment."

[Illustration: "_Was Looking at Herself in a Mirror_"
Original Etching by Adrian Marcel]

"At length," said Sarah, as soon as she was alone with her brother, "at
length I trust this crown--the dream of my life: the prediction is on
the eve of fulfilment!"

"Sarah, calm your excitement!" said her brother to her; "yesterday your
life was despaired of, and to be again disappointed would deal you a
mortal blow!"

"You are right, Thomas; the fall would be fearful, for my hopes were
never nearer realisation! Of this I feel assured, for it was my constant
thought of profiting by the overwhelming revelation which this woman
made me at the moment of her assassination that prevented me from
sinking under my sufferings."

"Again, Sarah, let me counsel you to beware of such insensate
dreams,--the awaking would be terrible!"

"Insensate dreams! What, when Rodolph learns that this young girl, who
is now locked up in St. Lazare, and formerly confided to the notary, who
has passed her off for dead, is our child! Do you suppose that--"

Seyton interrupted his sister. "I believe," he said, bitterly, "that
princes place reasons of state, political conveniences, before natural
duties."

"Do you then rely so little on my address?"

"The prince is no longer the ingenuous and impassioned youth whom you
attracted and swayed in other days; that time is long ago, both for him
and for you, sister."

Sarah shrugged her shoulders, and said, "Do you know why I was desirous
of placing this bandeau of coral in my hair,--why I put on this white
dress? It is because the first time Rodolph saw me at the court of
Gerolstein I was dressed in white, and wore this very bandeau of coral
in my hair."

"What!" said Seyton, "you would awake those remembrances? Do you not
rather fear their influence?"

"I know Rodolph better than you do. No doubt my features, changed by
time and sufferings, are no longer those of the young girl of sixteen,
whom he so madly loved,--only loved, for I was his first love; and that
love, unique in the life of man, always leaves ineffaceable traces in
the heart. Thus, then, brother, trust me that the sight of this ornament
will awaken in Rodolph not only the recollection of his love, but those
of his youth also; and for men these souvenirs are always sweet and
precious."

"But these sweet and precious souvenirs will be united with others so
terrible: the sinister _dénouement_ of your love, the detestable
behaviour of the prince's father to you, your obstinate silence to
Rodolph. After your marriage with the Count Macgregor, he demanded his
daughter, then an infant,--your child,--of whose death, ten years since,
you informed him so coldly in your letter. Do you forget that from that
period the prince has felt nothing but contempt and hatred for you?"

"Pity has replaced his hatred. Since he has learned that I am dying, he
has sent the Baron de Graün every day to inquire after me; and just now
he has promised to come here; and that is an immense concession,
brother."

"He believes you dying,--that you desire a last adieu,--and so he comes.
You were wrong not to write to him of the discovery you are about to
disclose to him."

"I know why I do so. This discovery will fill him with surprise, joy,
and I shall be present to profit by his first burst of softened feeling.
To-day or never he will say to me, 'A marriage must legitimise the birth
of our child!' If he says so, his word is sacred, and then will the hope
of my life be realised!"

"Yes, if he makes you the promise."

"And that he may do so, nothing must be neglected under these decisive
circumstances. I know Rodolph; and once having found his daughter, he
will overcome his aversion for me, and will not retreat from any
sacrifice to assure her the most enviable lot, to make her as entirely
happy as she has been until now wretched."

"However brilliant the destiny he may assure to your daughter, there is,
between the reparation to her and the resolution to marry you in order
to legitimise the birth of this child, a very wide abyss."

"Her father will pass over this abyss."

"But this unfortunate child has, perhaps, been so vitiated by the misery
in which she has lived that the prince, instead of feeling attracted
towards her--"

"What are you saying?" cried Sarah, interrupting her brother. "Is she
not as handsome, as a young girl, as she was a lovely infant? Rodolph,
without knowing her, was so deeply interested in her as to take charge
of her future destiny, and sent her to his farm at Bouqueval, whence we
carried her off."

"Yes, thanks to your obstinacy in desiring to break all the ties of the
prince's affection, in the foolish hope of one day leading him back to
yourself!"

"And yet, but for this foolish hope, I should not have discovered, at
the price of my life, the secret of my daughter's existence. Is it not
through this woman, who had carried her off from the farm, that I have
learned the infamous deceit of the notary, Ferrand?"

"It would have been better to have awaited the young creature's coming
out of prison, before you sent to request the Grand Duke to come here."

"Awaited! And do I know that the salutary crisis in which I now am will
last until to-morrow? Perhaps I am but momentarily sustained by my
ambition only."

"What proofs have you for the prince, and will he believe you?"

"He will believe me when he reads the commencement of, the disclosure
which I wrote from the dictation of that woman who stabbed me,--a
disclosure of which I have, fortunately, forgotten no circumstance. He
will believe me when he reads your correspondence with Madame Séraphin
and Jacques Ferrand, as to the supposed death of the child; he will
believe me when he hears the confession of the notary, who, alarmed at
my threats, will come here immediately; he will believe me when he sees
the portrait of my daughter at six years of age, a portrait which the
woman told me was still a striking resemblance. So many proofs will
suffice to convince the prince that I speak the truth, and to decide him
as to his first impulse, which will make me almost a queen. Oh, if it
were but for a day, I could die content!"

At this moment a carriage was heard to enter the courtyard.

"It is he! It is Rodolph!" exclaimed Sarah.

Thomas Seyton drew a curtain hastily aside, and replied, "Yes, it is the
prince; he is just alighting from the carriage."

"Leave me! This is the decisive moment!" said Sarah, with unshaken
coolness; for a monstrous ambition, a pitiless selfishness, had always
been and still was the only moving spring of this woman. Even in the
almost miraculous reappearance of her daughter, she only saw a means of
at last arriving at the one end and aim of her whole existence.

Seyton said to her, "I will tell the prince how your daughter, believed
dead, was saved. This conversation would be too dangerous for you,--a
too violent emotion would kill you; and after so long a separation, the
sight of the prince, the recollection of bygone times--"

"Your hand, brother!" replied Sarah. Then, placing on her impassive
heart Tom Seyton's hand, she added, with an icy smile, "Am I excited?"

"No, no; not even a hurried pulsation," said Seyton, amazed. "I know not
what control you have over yourself; but at such a moment, when it is
for a crown or a coffin you play, your calmness amazes me!"

"And wherefore, brother? Till now, you know, nothing has made my heart
beat hastily; and it will only throb when I feel the sovereign crown
upon my brow. I hear Rodolph--leave me!"

When Rodolph entered the apartment, his look expressed pity; but, seeing
Sarah seated in her armchair, and, as it were, full dressed, he recoiled
in surprise, and his features became gloomy and mistrustful. The
countess, guessing his thoughts, said to him, in a low and faint voice,
"You thought to find me dying! You came to receive my last adieu!"

"I have always considered the last wishes of the dead as sacred, but it
appears now as if there were some sacrilegious deceit--"

"Be assured," said Sarah, interrupting Rodolph, "be assured that I have
not deceived you! I believe that I have but very few hours to live.
Pardon me a last display of coquetry! I wished to spare you the gloomy
symptoms that usually attend the dying hour, and to die attired as I was
the first time I saw you. Alas, after ten years of separation, I see you
once again! Thanks, oh, thanks! But in your turn give thanks to God for
having inspired you with the thought of hearing my last prayer! If you
had refused me, I should have carried my secret with me to the grave,
which will now cause the joy, the happiness of your life,--joy, mingled
with some sadness, happiness, mingled with some tears, like all human
felicity; but this felicity you would yet purchase at the price of half
the remainder of your existence!"

"What do you mean?" asked the prince, with great amazement.

"Yes, Rodolph, if you had not come, this secret would have followed me
to the tomb! That would have been my sole vengeance. And yet, no, no! I
shall not have the courage. Although you have made me suffer deeply, I
yet must have shared with you that supreme happiness which you, more
blessed than myself, will, I hope, long enjoy!"

"Madame, what does this mean?"

"When you know, you will be able to comprehend my slowness in informing
you, for you will view it as a miracle from heaven; but, strange to say,
I, who with a word can cause you pleasure greater than you have ever
experienced, I experience, although the minutes of my life are counted,
I experience an indefinable satisfaction at prolonging your expectation.
And then, I know your heart; and in spite of the fierceness of your
character, I fear, without preparation, to reveal to you so incredible a
discovery. The emotions of overwhelming joy have also their dangers."

"Your paleness increases, you can scarcely repress your violent
agitation," said Rodolph; "all this indicates something grave and
solemn."

"Grave and solemn!" replied Sarah, in an agitated voice; for, in spite
of her habitual impassiveness, when she reflected on the immense effect
of the disclosure she was about to make to Rodolph, she was more
troubled than she believed possible; and, unable any longer to restrain
herself, she exclaimed, "Rodolph, our daughter lives!"

"Our daughter!"

"Lives, I say!"

These words, the accents of truth in which they were pronounced, shook
the prince to his very heart. "Our child!" he repeated, going hurriedly
to the chair in which Sarah was, "our child--my daughter!"

"Is not dead, I have irresistible proof; I know where she is; to-morrow
you shall see her."

"My daughter! My daughter!" repeated Rodolph, with amazement. "Can it be
that she lives?" Then, suddenly reflecting on the improbability of such
an event, and fearing to be the dupe of some fresh treachery on Sarah's
part, he cried, "No, no, it is a dream! Impossible! I know your
ambition--of what you are capable--and I see through the drift of this
proposed treachery!"

"Yes, you say truly; I am capable of all--everything! Yes, I desired to
abuse you; some days before the mortal blow was struck, I sought to find
out some young girl that I might present to you as our daughter. After
this confession, you will perhaps believe me, or, rather, you will be
compelled to credit irresistible evidence. Yes, Rodolph, I repeat I
desired to substitute a young and obscure girl for her whom we both
deplore; but God willed that at the moment when I was arranging this
sacrilegious bargain, I should be almost fatally stabbed!"

"You--at this moment!"

"God so willed it that they should propose to me to play the part of
falsehood--imagine whom? Our daughter!"

"Are you delirious, in heaven's name?"

"Oh, no, I am not delirious! In this casket, containing some papers and
a portrait, which will prove to you the truth of what I say, you will
find a paper stained with my blood!"

"Your blood!"

"The woman who told me that our daughter was still living declared to me
this disclosure when she stabbed me with her dagger."

"And who was she? How did she know?"

"It was she to whom the child was confided when very young, after she
had been declared dead."

"But this woman? Can she be believed? How did you know her?"

"I tell you, Rodolph, that this is all fated--providential! Some months
ago you snatched a young girl from misery, to send her to the country.
Jealousy and hatred possessed me. I had her carried off by the woman of
whom I have been speaking."

"And they took the poor girl to St. Lazare?"

"Where she is still."

"She is there no longer. Ah, you do not know, madame, the fearful evil
you have occasioned me by snatching the unfortunate girl away from the
retreat in which I had placed her; but--"

"The young girl is no longer at St. Lazare!" cried Sarah, with dismay;
"ah, what fearful news is this!"

"A monster of avarice had an interest in her destruction. They have
drowned her, madame! But answer! You say that--"

"My daughter!" exclaimed Sarah, interrupting Rodolph, and standing
erect, as straight and motionless as a statue of marble.

"What does she say? Good heaven!" cried Rodolph.

"My daughter!" repeated Sarah, whose features became livid and frightful
in their despair. "They have murdered my daughter!"

"The Goualeuse your daughter!" uttered Rodolph, retreating with horror.

"The Goualeuse! Yes, that was the name which the woman they call the
Chouette used. Dead--dead!" repeated Sarah, still motionless, with her
eyes fixed. "They have killed her!"

"Sarah!" said Rodolph, as pale and as fearful to look upon as the
countess; "be calm,--recover yourself,--answer me! The Goualeuse,--the
young girl whom you had carried off by the Chouette from Bouqueval,--was
she our daughter?"

"Yes. And they have killed her!"

"Oh, no, no; you are mad! It cannot be! You do not know! No, no; you
cannot tell how fearful this would be! Sarah, be firm,--speak to me
calmly,--sit down,--compose yourself! There are often resemblances,
appearances which deceive if we are inclined to believe what we desire.
I do not reproach you; but explain yourself to me, tell me all the
reasons which induced you to think this; for it cannot be,--no, no, it
cannot be,--it is not so!"

After a moment's pause, the countess collected her thoughts, and said to
Rodolph, in a faltering voice, "Learning your marriage, and thinking of
marrying myself, I could not keep our child with me; she was then four
years of age."

"But at that time I begged her of you with prayers, entreaties," cried
Rodolph, in a heartrending tone, "and my letters were unanswered; the
only one you wrote to me announced her death!"

"I was desirous of avenging myself of your contempt by refusing your
child. It was shameful; but hear me! I feel my life ebbs from me; this
last blow has overcome me!"

"No, no, I do not believe you; I will not believe you! The Goualeuse my
daughter! Oh, _mon Dieu_! You would not have this so!"

"Listen to me! When she was four years old, my brother charged Madame
Séraphin, the widow of an old servant, to bring the child up until she
was old enough to go to school. The sum destined to support our child
was deposited by my brother with a notary, celebrated for his honesty.
The letters of this man and Madame Séraphin, addressed at the time to me
and my brother, are there, in the casket. At the end of a year they
wrote me word that my daughter's health was failing,--eight months
afterwards that she was dead, and they sent the register of her decease.
At this time Madame Séraphin had entered the service of Jacques Ferrand,
after having given our daughter over to the Chouette, through the medium
of a wretch who is now at the galleys at Rochefort. I was writing down
all this when the Chouette stabbed me. This paper is there also, with a
portrait of our daughter when four years of age. Examine all,--letters,
declaration, portrait,--and you who have seen her, the unhappy child,
will judge--"

These words exhausted Sarah, and she fell fainting into her armchair.

Rodolph was thunderstruck at this disclosure. There are misfortunes so
unforeseen, so horrible, that we try not to believe them until the
overwhelming evidence compels us. Rodolph, persuaded of the death of
Fleur-de-Marie, had but one hope,--that of convincing himself that she
was not his daughter. With a frightful calmness that alarmed Sarah, he
approached the table, opened the casket, and began to read the letters,
examining with scrupulous attention the papers which accompanied them.

These letters, bearing the postmark, and dated, written to Sarah and her
brother by the notary and Madame Séraphin, related to the infancy of
Fleur-de-Marie, and the investment of the money destined for her.
Rodolph could not doubt the authenticity of this correspondence.

The Chouette's declaration was confirmed by the particulars collected at
Rodolph's desire, in which a felon named Pierre Tournemine, then at
Rochefort, was described as the individual who had received
Fleur-de-Marie from the hands of Madame Séraphin, for the purpose of
giving her up to the Chouette,--the relentless tormentor of her early
years,--and whom she afterwards so unexpectedly recognised when in
company with Rodolph at the _tapis-franc_ of the ogress.

The attestation of the child's death was duly drawn up and attested, but
Ferrand himself had confessed to Cecily that it had merely been employed
to obtain possession of a considerable sum of money due to the
unfortunate infant, whose decease it so falsely recorded, and who had
subsequently been drowned by his order while crossing to the Isle du
Ravageur.

It was, therefore, with appalling conviction Rodolph learnt at once the
double facts of the Goualeuse being his long-lost daughter, and of her
having perished by a violent death. Unfortunately, everything seemed to
give greater certitude to his belief, and to render further doubt
impossible. Ere the prince could bring himself to place implicit
credence in the self-condemnation of Jacques Ferrand, as conveyed in the
notes furnished by him to Cecily, he had made the closest inquiries at
Asnières, and had ascertained that two females, one old, the other
young, dressed in the garb of countrywomen, had been drowned while
crossing the river to the Isle du Ravageur, and that Martial was openly
accused of having committed this fresh crime.

Let us add, in conclusion, that, despite the utmost care and attention
on the part of Doctor Griffon, Count de Saint-Remy, and La Louve,
Fleur-de-Marie was long ere she could be pronounced out of danger, and
then so extreme was her exhaustion, both of body and mind, that she had
been unfit for the least conversation, and wholly unequal to making any
effort to apprise Madame Georges of her situation.

This coincidence of circumstances left the prince without the smallest
shadow of hope; but had such even remained, it was doomed to disappear
before a last and fatal proof of the reality of his misfortune. He, for
the first time, ventured to cast his eyes towards the miniature he had
received. The blow fell with stunning conviction on his heart; for in
the exquisitely beautiful features it revealed, rich in all the
infantine loveliness ascribed to cherubic innocence, he recognised the
striking portrait of Fleur-de-Marie,--her finely chiselled nose, the
lofty forehead, with the small, delicately formed mouth, even then
wearing an expression of sorrowing tenderness. Alas! Had not Madame
Séraphin well accounted for this somewhat uncommon peculiarity in an
infant's face by saying, in a letter written by her to Sarah, which
Rodolph had just perused, "The child is continually inquiring for its
mother, and seems to grieve very much at not seeing her." There were
also those large, soft, blue eyes, "the colour of a blue-bell," as the
Chouette observed to Sarah, upon recognising in this miniature the
features of the unfortunate creature she had so ruthlessly tormented as
Pegriotte, and as a young girl under the appellation of La Goualeuse. At
the sight of this picture the violent and tumultuous emotions of the
prince were lost amid a flood of mingled tears and sighs.

While Rodolph thus indulged his bitter grief, the countenance of Sarah
become powerfully agitated; she saw the last hope which had hitherto
sustained her of realising the ambitious dreams of her life fade away at
the very moment when she had expected their full accomplishment.

All at once Rodolph raised his head, dashed away his tears, and, rising
from his chair, advanced towards Sarah with folded arms and dignified,
determined air. After silently gazing on her for some moments, he said:

"'Tis fair and right it should be so! I raised my sword against my
father's life, and I am stricken through my own child! The parricide is
worthily punished for his sin! Then, listen to me, madame! 'Tis fit you
should learn in this agonising moment all the evils which have been
brought about by your insatiate ambition, your unprincipled selfishness!
Listen, then, heartless and unfeeling wife, base and unnatural mother!"

"Mercy, mercy! Rodolph, pity me, and spare me!"

"There is no pity, there can be no pardon for such as you, who coldly
trafficked in a love pure and sincere as was mine, with the assumed
pretext of sharing a passion generous and devoted as was my own for you.
There can be no pity for her who excites the son against the father, no
pardon for the unnatural parent who, instead of carefully watching over
the infancy of her child, abandons it to the care of vile mercenaries,
in order to satisfy her grasping avarice by a rich marriage, as you
formerly gratified your inordinate ambition by espousing me. No! There
is no mercy, pity, or pardon for one who, like yourself, first refuses
my child to all my prayers and entreaties, and afterwards, by a series
of profane and vile machinations, causes her death! May Heaven's curse
light on you, as mine does, thou evil genius of myself and all belonging
to me!"

"He has no relenting pity in his heart! He is deaf to all my appeals!
Wretched woman that I am! Oh, leave me--leave me--I beseech!"

"Nay, you shall hear me out! Do you remember our last meeting, now
seventeen years ago? You were unable longer to conceal the consequences
of our secret marriage, which, like you, I believed indissoluble. I well
knew the inflexible character of my father, as well as the political
marriage he wished me to form; but braving alike his displeasure and its
results, I boldly declared to him that you were my wife before God and
man, and that ere long you would bring into the world a proof of our
love. My father's rage was terrible; he refused to believe in our union.
Such startling opposition to his will appeared to him impossible; and he
threatened me with his heaviest displeasure if I presumed again to
insult his ear by the mention of such folly. I then loved you with a
passion bordering on madness. Led away by your wiles and artifices, I
believed your cold, stony heart felt a reciprocity of tenderness for me,
and I therefore unhesitatingly replied that I never would call any woman
wife but yourself. At these words his fury knew no bounds. He heaped on
you the most insulting epithets, exclaiming that the marriage I talked
of was null and void, and that to punish you for your presumption in
daring even to think of such a thing, he would have you publicly exposed
in the pillory of the city. Yielding alike to the violence of my mad
passion, and the impetuosity of my disposition, I presumed to forbid
him, who was at once my parent and my sovereign, speaking thus
disrespectfully of one I loved far beyond my own life, and I even went
so far as to threaten him if he persisted in so doing. Exasperated at
my conduct, my father struck me. Blinded by rage, I drew my sword, and
threw myself on him with deadly fury. Happily the intervention of Murphy
turned away the blow, and saved me from being as much a parricide in
deed as I was in intention. Do you hear me, madame? A parricide! And in
your defence!"

"Alas! I knew not this misfortune."

"In vain have I sought to expiate my crime. This blow to-day is sent by
Heaven's avenging hand to repay my heavy crime."

"But have I not sufficiently suffered from the inveterate enmity of your
father, who dissolved our marriage? Wherefore add to my misery by doubts
of the sincerity of my affection for you?"

"Wherefore?" exclaimed Rodolph, darting on her looks of the most
withering contempt. "Learn now my reasons, and cease to wonder at the
loathing horror with which you inspire me. After the fatal scene in
which I had threatened the life of my father, I surrendered my sword,
and was kept in the closest confinement. Polidori, through whose
instrumentality our union had been effected, was arrested; and he
distinctly proved that our marriage had never been legally contracted,
the minister, as well as the other persons concerned in its
solemnisation, being merely creatures tutored and bribed by him; so that
both you, your brother, and myself, were equally deceived. The more
effectually to turn away my father's wrath from himself, Polidori did
still more; he gave up one of your letters to your brother, which he had
managed to intercept during a journey taken by Seyton."

"Heavens! Can it be possible?"

"Can you now account for my contempt and aversion towards you?"

"Too, too well!"

"In this letter you developed your ambitious projects with unblushing
effrontery. Me you spoke of with the utmost indifference, treating me
but as the blind instrument by which you should arrive at the princely
station predicted for you. You expressed your opinion that my father had
already lived long enough,--perhaps too long; and hinted at
probabilities and possibilities too horrible to repeat!"

"Alas! All is now but too apparent. I am lost for ever!"

"And yet to protect you, I had even menaced my father's existence!"

"When he next visited me, and, without uttering one word of reproach,
put into my hands your letter, every line of which more clearly revealed
the black enormity of your nature, I could but kneel before him and
entreat his pardon. But from that hour I have been a prey to the
deepest, the most acute remorse. I immediately quitted Germany for the
purpose of travelling, with the intent, if possible, of expiating my
guilt; and this self-imposed task I shall continue while I live. To
reward the good, to punish the evil-doer, relieve those who suffer,
penetrate into every hideous corner where vice holds her court, for the
purpose of rescuing some unfortunate creatures from the destruction into
which they have fallen,--such is the employment I have marked out for
myself."

"It is a noble and holy task,--one worthy of being performed by you."

"If I speak of this sacred vow," said Rodolph, disdainfully, "it is not
to draw down your approbation or praise. But hearken to what remains to
be told; I have lately arrived in France, and I wished not to let my
great purpose of continual expiatory acts stand still during my sojourn
in this country. While I sought then to succour those of good
reputation, who were in unmerited distress, I was also desirous of
knowing that class of miserable beings who are beaten down, trampled
under feet, and brutalised by want and wretchedness, well knowing that
timely help, a few kind and encouraging words, may frequently have
power to save a lost creature from the abyss into which he is falling.
In order to be an eye-witness of the circumstances under which my work
of expiation would be useful, I assumed the dress and appearance of
those I wished to mix with. It was during one of these exploring
adventures that I first encountered--" Then, as though shuddering at the
idea of so terrible a disclosure, Rodolph, after a momentary hesitation,
added, "No, no; I have not courage to finish the dreadful story!"

"For the love of heaven, tell me what horror have you now to unfold?"

"You will hear it but too soon! But," added he, with sarcastic
bitterness, "you seem to take so lively an interest in past events that
I cannot refrain from relating to you a few events which preceded my
return to France. After passing some time in my travels, I returned to
Germany, filled with a spirit of obedience to my father, by whose desire
I espoused a princess of Prussia. During my absence you had been
banished from the Grand Duchy. Subsequently, learning your marriage with
Count Macgregor, I again entreated you to allow me to have my child. To
this earnest request no answer was returned; nor could my strictest
inquiries ever discover whither you had sent the unfortunate infant, for
whom my father had made a handsome provision. About ten years ago I
received a letter from you, stating that our child was dead. Would to
God your information had been correct, and that she had indeed rendered
up her innocent life at that tender age! I should then have been spared
the deep, incurable anguish which must for ever embitter my life!"

"I cease now to wonder," said Sarah, in a feeble voice, "at the disgust
and aversion with which I seem to have inspired you; and I feel, too
surely, that I shall not survive this last blow. You are right; pride
and ambition have been my ruin. Ignorant of the just causes you had to
hate and despise me, my former hopes returned with greater force than
ever. Our mutual widowhood inspired me with a still stronger belief in
the prediction which promised me a crown; and when, by singular chance,
I again found my daughter, it appeared to me as though the hand of
Providence had bestowed this unhoped-for good fortune on me to further
my so long cherished plans. Yes, I will confess that I went so far as to
persuade myself that, spite of the aversion you entertained for me, you
would bestow on me your name, and that, out of regard for your child,
you would accept me as your wife, if but to elevate her to the rank to
which she is entitled."

"Then let your execrable ambition be satisfied, and punished as it
deserves; for, spite of the abhorrence I now hold you in, I would, out
of love for my child, or, rather, from a deep pity for its early
sorrows,--I would, although firmly determined always to live apart from
you, by a marriage which should have legitimised my daughter, have
rendered her future lot as brilliant and exalted as her past life has
been wretched."

"I had not, then, deceived myself? Oh, misery! To think it is now too
late!"

"Oh, I am well aware it is not your child you regret, but the loss of
that rank you have so eagerly and obstinately striven to obtain. May
your unfeeling and disgraceful regrets pursue you to your grave!"

"Then they will not long torment me; for I feel I shall not long survive
this final ending of all my ambitious schemes."

"But ere your existence closes, it is but fair and just you should be
made aware what sort of life your poor deserted child's has been. Do you
recollect the night on which you and your brother followed me into a den
in the Cité?"

"Perfectly! But why this question? It freezes me with horror; your looks
fill me with dread!"

"As you approached this low haunt of vice, you saw--did you
not?--standing at the corners of the low streets with which that
neighbourhood abounds, groups of poor, unfortunate, guilty creatures,
who--who--But I cannot finish the dreadful tale!" cried Rodolph,
concealing his face with his hands. "I dare not proceed; my own words
affright me!"

"As they do me! What more have I to learn?"

"You saw them, I ask,--did you not?" resumed Rodolph, making a powerful
struggle to overcome his emotion. "You observed these base and degraded
creatures, the shame and disgrace of their own sex? But did you remark
among them a young girl of about sixteen years of age, lovely as an
angel,--a poor child, who, amid the infamy in which she had lived during
the last few weeks, still retained a look so pure, so innocent, and good
that even the ruffians by whom she was surrounded called her
Fleur-de-Marie? Did you observe this,--this fair, this interesting
being? Answer,--answer,--tender, exemplary mother!"

"No!" answered Sarah, almost mechanically; "I did not observe the young
person you speak of." But the teeth rattled in Sarah's head as she
spoke, and her whole frame seemed oppressed with a vague though fearful
dread of coming evil.

"Indeed!" cried Rodolph, with a sardonic smile. "Indeed! I am surprised
at that! Well, I did remark, and upon the following occasion. Listen
attentively to what I am about to relate! During one of the exploring
excursions I before spoke of, I found myself in the Cité, not far from
the den to which you followed me. A man was just going to beat one of
the unfortunate creatures who herd together there; I interposed, and
saved her from his brutal rage. Now then, careful, kind, and anxious
mother, tell me, if you can, whom it was I saved! Can you not guess?
Speak! Say your heart whispers to you who was the miserable being I
found in this sink of wickedness and pollution! You know, do you not,
without my assistance?"

"No, no,--I cannot say! I beseech you to go--and leave me to my
thoughts!"

"Then I will tell you who the wretched, trembling creature I thus saved
from brutal violence was. Her name was Fleur-de-Marie!"

"Merciful powers!"

"And is it possible that you, most irreproachable of mothers, that you
cannot divine who Fleur-de-Marie was?"

"Be merciful, and kill me; but torture me not thus!"

"She was your daughter--known as the Goualeuse!" cried Rodolph, with
almost frantic violence. "Yes, the helpless girl I rescued from the
hands of a felon was my own, my lost child!--the offspring of Rodolph of
Gerolstein! Oh, there was in this meeting with a daughter I
unconsciously saved a visible interposition of the hand of Providence!
It brought a blessing to the man who had striven so earnestly to succour
his fellow men, and it conveyed a well-merited chastisement for the
impious wretch who had dared to aim at his father's life!"

"Alas!" murmured Sarah, falling back in her armchair, and concealing her
face with her hands, "my destiny is accomplished! I die, carrying with
me out of the world the curse both of God and man!"

"And when," continued Rodolph, with much difficulty restraining his
resentment, and vainly striving to repress the sobs which from time to
time interrupted his voice, "when I had released her from the ill-usage
with which she was menaced, struck with the indescribable sweetness of
her voice and manner, as well as by the angelic expression of her lovely
countenance, I found it impossible to abandon the interest she excited
in me. I led her on to tell me the history of her life, made up of
neglect, grief, and misery. With what simple eloquence did she express
the yearnings of a heart that had never expanded into virtue beneath a
mother's fostering care after a life of innocence, and how touchingly
did she dwell on the the destitution which had led her where she was!
Ah, madame, to have brought down your pride and haughtiness, you should
have listened as I did while your daughter described her early years as
passed in shivering beggary, soliciting charity in the streets all day,
and at night, when the cold winter's wind pierced through the few rags
she wore, creeping to her bed of straw strewn in the corner of a
wretched garret; and when the horrible old hag who tortured her had
exhausted every other means of inflicting pain on her, what do you think
she did, madame? Why, wrenched out her teeth! And all this starving and
desolation was experienced by your own child, while you were revelling
in every sort of luxury, and indulging in ambitious dreams of sharing a
crown!"

"Oh, that I could die, and so escape the direful agony I suffer!"

"Nay you have more to hear! Escaping from the hands of the Chouette,
wandering about, penniless and starving, at the tender age of only ten
years she was taken up as a vagabond, and as such thrown into prison.
And yet, madame, that period was the happiest your poor deserted child
had ever known. And each night, though surrounded by her prison walls,
she gratefully thanked God that she no longer suffered from hunger,
thirst, or blows. It was in a prison she passed those years so precious
to the well-being of a young female, those years over which a good and
affectionate mother so carefully and anxiously watches. As her sixteenth
year commenced, your daughter, instead of being surrounded by the tender
solicitude of loving relatives, and enriched with all the gifts of
education, had seen and known nothing more edifying or elevated than the
brutal indifference of her gaolers. Yet this naturally pure-minded,
beautiful, and ingenuous creature was at that dangerous moment sent
forth from her safe asylum--a gaol--and left to wander unaided and
unprotected in a world of which she knew so little! Unfortunate,
deserted, friendless child!" continued Rodolph, giving free vent to the
swelling sobs which had continually impeded his voice, "yours was,
indeed, a bitter lot, thrown thus young and helpless amid the mire and
pollution of a great city!

[Illustration: "_They Took Her to Their Guilty Haunts_"
Original Etching by Mercier]

"Ah, madame!" cried he, addressing Sarah, "however cold, hard, and
selfish your heart may be, you could not have refrained from weeping at
the recital of your poor, neglected child's misery and privations! Poor,
hapless girl! Sullied, but not corrupted; chaste in heart even amid the
degradation into which she had fallen; for each word she uttered
breathed the most unfeigned horror and disgust at the mode of life to
which she was so fatally condemned. Oh, could you but have known what
delicate thoughts, what noble, high-minded inspirations were betrayed in
her every word and action! How good, how feeling, how innately
charitable was her nature! For it was to relieve a degree of misery even
greater than her own that she exhausted the small sum of money she had
received on quitting her prison, and which, while it lasted, formed her
only defence from the abyss of infamy into which she was afterwards
plunged; for there came a time,--a hideous time, when, without
employment, food, or shelter, some horrible women found her almost
perishing from weakness and want of support. Under pretence of aiding
her, they took her to their guilty haunts, administered intoxicating
drugs, and--and--"

Rodolph could proceed no further. He uttered a distracting cry, and
exclaimed, "And this was my child!"

"May Heaven's punishment be on me for what I have done!" said Sarah,
hiding her face as though she feared to meet the light of day.

"Ay!" exclaimed Rodolph. "And it will assuredly cling to you all your
life, and haunt even your dying pillow; for it is your neglect and
abandonment of all a mother's most sacred duties which have led to all
these horrors. Accursed may you ever be for your double wickedness
towards your unoffending child! For even after I had succeeded in
removing her from the guilt and pollution by which she was surrounded,
and had placed her in a safe and peaceful asylum, you set your vile
accomplices on to tear her thence! My curse be for ever on you! For it
was owing to your causing her to be forcibly carried off which threw her
back into the power of Jacques Ferrand."

As Rodolph pronounced this name he suddenly stopped and shuddered. The
features of the prince assumed an expression of concentrated rage and
hatred impossible to describe; mute and motionless he stood, as though
crushed to the earth by the reflection that the murderer of his child
was still in existence.

Spite of the increasing weakness of Sarah and the agitation caused by
this interview with Rodolph, she was so much struck with his threatening
aspect that she faintly exclaimed:

"In mercy say what fresh idea has taken possession of your mind?"

"No, no," responded Rodolph, as though speaking to himself; "till now I
thought to spare this monster, believing a life of enforced charity
would be to him one of never ending torment. Now I must revenge my
infant child, delivered up by him to want and misery! I have to wash out
the stain of my daughter's infamy, caused by his diabolical villainy and
cupidity; and his blood alone will serve to wipe out that foul wrong!
Yes, he dies--and by my hand!" And, with these words, the prince sprang
forward to the door.

"Whither are you going?" cried Sarah, extending her supplicating hands
towards Rodolph. "Oh, leave me not to die alone--"

"Alone? Oh, no! Fear not to die alone! The spectre of the innocent
child, doomed by you to an early grave, will bear you company."

Exhausted and alarmed, Sarah uttered a scream, as though she really
beheld the phantom of her child, exclaiming, "Forgive me! I am dying!"

"Die then, accursed woman!" shouted Rodolph, wild with fury. "Now I must
have the life of your accomplice, for it was you who delivered your
child to this monster!"

And hastening from the apartment, Rodolph ordered himself to be rapidly
driven to the residence of Jacques Ferrand.




CHAPTER III.

LOVE'S FRENZY.


It was nightfall when Rodolph went to the notary's. The pavilion
occupied by Jacques Ferrand was plunged in the deepest obscurity; the
wind roared and the rain fell as it did on the terrible night when
Cecily, before she quitted the notary's abode for ever, had excited the
passions of that man to frenzy. Extended on his bed, feebly lighted up
by a lamp, Jacques Ferrand was dressed in a black coat and waistcoat.
One of the sleeves of his shirt was tucked up and spotted with blood; a
ligature of red cloth, which was to be seen on his nervous arm,
announced that he had been bled by Polidori, who, standing near his bed,
leaned one hand on the couch, and seemed to watch his accomplice's
features with uneasiness. Nothing could be more frightfully hideous than
was Jacques Ferrand, whilst plunged in that somnolent torpor which
usually succeeds violent crises. Of an ashy paleness, his face was
bedewed with a cold sweat, and his closed eyelids were so swollen, so
injected with blood, that they appeared like two red balls in the centre
of his cadaverous countenance.

"Another such an attack and he is a dead man!" exclaimed Polidori, in a
low voice. "All the writers on this subject have agreed that all who are
attacked by this strange and frightful malady usually sink under it on
the seventh day, and it is now six days since that infernal creole
kindled the inextinguishable flame which is consuming this man." After
some minutes of further meditation, Polidori left the bedside and
walked slowly up and down the chamber.

The tempest was still raging without, and fell with such fury on this
dilapidated house as to shake it to its centre. Despite his audacity and
wickedness, Polidori was superstitious, and dark forebodings came over
him; he felt an undefinable uneasiness. In order to dissipate his gloomy
thoughts, he again examined Ferrand's features.

"Now," he said, leaning over him, "his eyelids are injected. It would
seem as though his blood flowed thither and stagnated. No doubt his
sight will now present, as his hearing did just now, some remarkable
appearance! What agonies now they endure! How they vary! Oh," he added,
with a bitter smile, "when nature determines on being cruel and playing
the part of a tormentor, she defies all the efforts of man; and thus in
this illness, caused by an erotic frenzy, she submits every sense to
unheard-of, superhuman tortures."

The storm still howled without, and Polidori, throwing himself into an
armchair, exclaimed, "What a night! What a night! Nothing could be worse
for Jacques's present state. Yes," he continued, "the prince is
pitiless, and it would have been a thousand times better for Ferrand to
have allowed his head to fall upon a scaffold; better fire, the wheel,
molten lead, which burns and eats into the flesh, than the miserable
punishment he endures! As I see him suffer I begin to feel affright for
my own fate! What will become of me? What is in reserve for me as the
accomplice of Jacques? To be his gaoler will not suffice for the
prince's vengeance. Perhaps a perpetual imprisonment in the prisons of
Germany awaits me! But that is better than death! Yet I know that the
prince's word is sacred! But I, who have so often violated all laws,
human and divine, dare I invoke a sworn promise? Inasmuch as it was to
my interest that Jacques should not escape, so will it be equally my
interest to prolong his days. But his symptoms grow worse and worse;
nothing but a miracle can save him. What is to be done? What is to be
done?"

At this moment, a crash without, occasioned by the fall of a stack of
chimneys, roused Jacques Ferrand, and he turned on his bed.

Polidori became more and more under the influence of the vague terror
which had seized on him. "It is folly to believe in presentments," he
said, in a troubled voice; "but the night seems to me very appalling!"

A heavy groan from the notary attracted Polidori's attention. "He is
awaking from his torpor," he said, approaching his bed very quietly;
"perhaps another crisis may ensue!"

"Polidori!" muttered Jacques Ferrand, still extended on the bed, and
with his eyes closed. "Polidori, what noise was that?"

"A chimney that fell," replied Polidori, in a low voice, fearing to
strike too loudly on the hearing of his accomplice. "A fearful tempest
shakes the house to its foundation; it is a horrible night!"

The notary did not hear, and replied, turning away his head, "Polidori,
you are not there, then?"

"Yes, yes, I am here," said Polidori, in a louder voice; "but I answered
gently for fear of giving you pain."

"No; I hear you now without any pain such as I had just now, for then it
seemed as if the least noise burst like thunder on my brain. And yet in
the midst of it all,--of these horrible sufferings,--I distinguish the
thrilling voice of Cecily, who was calling to me--"

"Still that infernal woman! But drive away these thoughts,--they will
kill you."

"These thoughts are life to me, and, like my life, they resist all
tortures."

"Madman that you are, it is these thoughts that cause your tortures!
Your illness is your sensual frenzy, which has attained its utmost
height. Once again, drive from your brain these thoughts or you will
die."

"Drive away these thoughts!" cried Ferrand. "Oh, never, never! When my
pains give me one moment's repose, Cecily, the demon whom I cherish and
curse, rises before my eyes!"

"What incredible fury! It frightens me!"

"There,--now!" said the notary, with a harsh voice, and his eyes fixed
on a dark corner of the room. "I see now the outline of an obscure and
white form; there--there!" and he extended his hairy and bony finger in
the direction of his sight. "There,--there she is!"

"Jacques, this is death to you!"

"Yes, I see her!" continued Ferrand, with his teeth clenched, and not
replying to Polidori. "There she is! And how beautiful! How her black
hair floats gracefully down her shoulders, and her small white teeth,
shining between her half opened lips,--her lips so red and humid! What
pearls! And how her black eyes sparkle and die! Cecily," he added, with
inexpressible excitement, "I adore you!"

"Jacques, do not excite yourself with such visions!"

"It is not a vision."

"Mind, mind! Just now, you know, you imagined you heard this woman's
love-songs, and your hearing was suddenly smitten with horrible agony.
Mind, I say!"

"Leave me,--leave me! What is the use of hearing but to hear, of seeing
but to see?"

"But the tortures which follow, miserable wretch!"

"I will brave them all for a deceit, as I have braved death for a
reality; and to me this burning image is reality. Ah, Cecily, you are
beautiful! Yet why torture me thus? Would you kill me? Ah, execrable
fury, cease,--cease, or I will strangle thee!" cried the notary, in
delirium.

"You kill yourself, unhappy man!" exclaimed Polidori, shaking the
notary violently, in order to rouse him from his excitement. In vain;
Jacques continued:

"Oh, beloved queen, demon of delight, never did I see--" The notary
could not finish; he uttered a sudden cry of pain and threw himself
back.

"What is it?" inquired Polidori, with astonishment.

"Put out that candle--it shines too brightly. I cannot endure it--it
blinds me!"

"What!" said Polidori, more and more surprised. "There is but one lamp
covered with its shade, and that shines very feebly."

"I tell you, the light increases here. Now, again--again! Oh, it is too
much; it is intolerable!" added Jacques Ferrand, closing his eyes with
an expression of increasing suffering.

"You are mad--the room is scarcely lighted. I tell you, open your eyes
and you will see."

"Open my eyes! Why, I shall be blinded by torrents of burning light,
with which this room is filled. Here! There! On all sides, there are
rays of fire--millions of dazzling scintillations!" cried the notary,
sitting up. And then again shrieking, he lifted both his hands to his
eyes: "But I am blind; this burning fire is through my closed lids,--it
burns--devours me! Ah, now my hands shield me a little! But put out the
light, for it throws an infernal flame!"

"It is beyond doubt now!" said Polidori. "His sight is struck with the
same excess of sensitiveness as his hearing was; he is a dead man! To
bleed him in this state would at once destroy him."

A fresh cry ensued, sharp and terrible, from Jacques Ferrand, which
resounded in the chamber.

"Villain, put out that lamp! Its glaring beams penetrate through my
hands, which they make transparent. I see the blood circulate in the net
of my veins, and I try in vain to close my eyelids, for the burning lava
will flow in. Oh, what torture! There are gushes as dazzling as if some
one were thrusting a red-hot iron into my eyes. Help, help!" he
shrieked, twisting himself on his bed, a prey to the horrible
convulsions of his extreme agony.

Polidori, alarmed at the excess of this fresh fit, suddenly extinguished
the lamp, and they were both in perfect darkness. At this moment the
noise of a carriage was heard at the door in the street. When the
chamber had been rendered entirely dark in which Polidori and Ferrand
were, the latter was somewhat relieved from his extreme pains.

"Where are you going?" said Polidori, suddenly, when he heard Jacques
Ferrand rise, for the deepest obscurity reigned in the apartment.

"I am going to find Cecily!"

"You shall not go; the sight of that room would kill you!"

"Cecily awaits me up there!"

"You shall not go--I will prevent you!" said Polidori, seizing the
notary by the arm.

Jacques Ferrand having reached the extremity of exhaustion, was unable
to contend with Polidori, who grasped him with a powerful clutch. "What,
would you prevent me from seeking Cecily?"

"Yes; and besides, there is a lamp in the next room, and you know what
an effect light so recently produced on your sight!"

"Cecily is up above; she is waiting for me, and I would cross a red-hot
furnace to rejoin her. Let me go! She called me her old tiger; mind you,
then, for my claws are sharp!"

"You shall not go! I will sooner tie you down to your bed like a furious
madman!"

"Listen, Polidori! I am not mad--I am perfectly in my senses. I know
that Cecily is not really up there; but to me the phantoms of my
imagination are equal to realities."

"Silence!" cried Polidori, suddenly, and listening. "I just now thought
I heard a carriage stop at the door--and I was not mistaken! Now I hear
a sound of voices in the courtyard."

"You want to deceive me," said Jacques; "but I am not so easily
deceived."

"But, unhappy man, listen--listen! Don't you hear?"

"Let me go! Cecily is up-stairs; she calls me. Do not make me furious!
And now I say to you, mind--beware!"

"You shall not go out!"

"Take care!"

"You shall not go out. It is for my interest that you should remain."

"You would hinder me from seeking Cecily, and it is my interest that you
should die. There--there!" said the notary, in a gloomy tone.

Polidori uttered a cry. "Wretch! You have stabbed me in the arm. But
your hand was weak--the wound is slight--and you shall not escape me."

"Your wound is mortal, for it was given by the poisoned stiletto of
Cecily, which I always carried about me. Await the effects of its
poison--Ah! You release me! Then now you are about to die! I was not to
be hindered from going up above to find Cecily!" added Jacques,
endeavouring to grope his way in darkness to the door.

"Oh," murmured Polidori, "my arm becomes benumbed--a deathlike coldness
seizes on me--my knees tremble under me--my blood freezes in my
veins--my head whirls around. Help, help! I die!" And he fainted.

The crash of glass doors, opened with so much violence that several
panes of glass were broken to atoms, the resounding voice of Rodolph,
and the noise of hastily approaching steps, seemed to reply to
Polidori's cry of anguish.

Jacques Ferrand having at length discovered the lock of the door, opened
it suddenly, with his dangerous stiletto in his hand. At the same
instant, as menacing and formidable as the genius of vengeance, the
prince entered the apartment from the other side.

"Monster!" he exclaimed, advancing towards Jacques Ferrand, "it was my
daughter whom you have killed! You are going--" The prince could not
conclude, but recoiled in amazement.

It would seem as if his words had been a thunderbolt to Ferrand, for,
casting away his dagger, and raising both his hands to his eyes, the
unhappy wretch fell with his face to the ground, uttering a cry that was
scarcely human.

To complete the phenomenon which we have attempted to describe, and the
action which profound obscurity had suspended, when Jacques Ferrand
entered the apartment so brilliantly lighted up, he was struck with an
overwhelming vertigo, just as though he had been suddenly cast into the
midst of a torrent of light as blazing as the disk of the sun. It was a
fearful spectacle to see the agony of this man, who was twisting in
convulsions, tearing the floor with his nails, as if he would have dug
himself a hole to escape from the atrocious tortures occasioned by this
powerful light. Rodolph, one of his servants, and the porter of the
house, who had been compelled to guide the prince hither, were struck
with horror.

In spite of his just hatred, Rodolph felt a pity for the unheard-of
sufferings of Jacques Ferrand, and desired that he should be laid on the
sofa. This was not effected without difficulty, for, from fear of being
subjected to the direst influence of the lamp, the notary struggled
violently; and when his face was covered with the full glare of the
light, he uttered another shriek,--a shriek which chilled Rodolph with
terror. After fresh and long torture, the phenomenon ceased by its very
violence. Having reached the last bounds of suffering without death
following, the visual torment ceased; but, according to the regular
course of the malady, a delirious excitement followed the crisis.
Jacques Ferrand became suddenly as stiffened in frame as an epileptic;
his eyelids, until then obstinately closed, suddenly opened, and,
instead of avoiding the light, his eyes fixed themselves on it
immovably, the pupils, in a state of extraordinary dilation and
fixedness, seeming phosphorescent and internally lighted up. He appeared
plunged in a kind of ecstatic contemplation; his body and limbs remained
at first in a state of complete immobility, his features being agitated
by nervous twitches and spasms. His hideous countenance, thus contracted
and twisted, had no longer any human appearance; and it appeared as if
the appetites of the animal, by stifling the intelligence of the man,
impressed on the features of this wretch a character absolutely bestial.
Having attained the mortal point of his madness, he remembered in his
delirium the words of Cecily, who had called him her tiger; gradually
his reason forsook him, and he imagined he was a tiger. His half
uttered, breathless words displayed the disorder of his brain, and the
singular aberration that had seized on him. Gradually his limbs, until
then stiff and motionless, extended; he fell from the sofa, and tried to
rise and walk, but his strength failed him; and he was compelled now to
crawl like a reptile, and now to drag himself along on his hands and
knees,--going, coming, this way and that way, as his visions impelled or
obtained possession of him. Crouched in one of the corners of the room,
like a tiger in his den, his hoarse and furious cries, his grinding of
teeth, the convulsive twistings of the muscles of his face and brows,
and his ardent gaze, gave him a wild and frightful resemblance to this
ferocious brute.

"Tiger--tiger--tiger--that I am!" he said, in a harsh voice, and
gathering himself into a heap. "Yes, tiger! What blood! In my cavern
what rent carcasses--La Goualeuse--the brother of this widow--a small
child, Louise's baby,--these are the carcasses, and my tigress Cecily
will have her share." Then looking at his torn fingers, the nails of
which had grown immensely during his illness, he added, in broken
language, "Oh, my sharp nails--sharp and keen! An old tiger I am, but
agile, strong, and bold; no one dares dispute my tigress Cecily with me.
Ah, she calls--she calls!" he said, advancing his hideous visage and
listening.

After a moment's silence he huddled himself against the wall again and
continued: "No! I thought I had heard her; but she is not there. Yet I
see her; oh, yes, always--always! Ah, there she is! She calls me; she
roars--roars down there! I'm here--I'm here!" and Ferrand dragged
himself towards the centre of the room on his hands and knees. Although
his strength was exhausted, he made a convulsive leap from time to time,
then paused, and listened attentively. "Where is she? I approach--she
goes away. Cecily, here is your old tiger!" he cried, as, with a last
effort, he arose and balanced himself on his knees. Suddenly falling
back with affright, his body bending on his heels, his hair on end, his
look haggard, his mouth twisted with terror, his two hands extended, he
seemed to struggle with desperation with some invisible object, uttering
incoherent words, and exclaiming, in broken tones, "What a bite! Help!
My hands are powerless; I cannot drive away these sharp teeth! No, no!
Oh! Not such eyes! Help! A serpent--a black snake--with its flat head
and fiery eyes. How it looks at me! It is the fiend! Ah, he knows
me--Jacques Ferrand--at church--the pious man--always at church! Go,
go--cross yourself!" And the notary, raising himself a little, and
leaning with one hand on the floor, endeavoured to cross himself with
the other. His livid brow was bathed in cold sweat, his eyes began to
lose their transparency and become dim, all the symptoms of approaching
death manifested themselves.

Rodolph and the other witnesses of the scene remained as motionless and
mute as if they had been under the effect of a frightful dream.

"Oh!" continued Jacques Ferrand, still half stretched on the floor, and
supporting himself by one hand, "the demon vanishes. I am going to
church--I am a holy man--I pray! What, no one will know it? Do you think
so? No, no, tempter--be quite sure! Well, let them come--these
women--all! Yes, all--if no one finds it out! But the secret!" he
continued, in a tone of exhaustion, "the secret! Ah, here they are!
Three! What says this one?--I am Louise Morel! Oh, yes--Louise Morel; I
know it! I am only one of the people! You think me handsome? Here--take
her! What does she bring me?--her head cut off by the executioner! It
looks at me, that head of death! It speaks! The livid lips move and say,
'Come--come--come!' I will not--I will not! Demon, leave me! Go--go--go!
And this other woman?--ah, beautiful, beautiful!--Jacques, I am the
Duchesse de Lucenay. See my angelic figure,--my smile,--my bold glance!
Come, come! Yes, I come. But wait! And who is this one who turns away
her face? Oh, Cecily--Cecily! Yes, Jacques, 'tis Cecily! You see the
three Graces,--Louise, the duchess, and myself. Choose! Beauty of the
people, patrician beauty, the savage beauty of the tropics,--and hell
with us! Come--come! Hell with you? Yes!" shrieked Jacques Ferrand,
again rising on his knees, and extending his arms to seize these
phantoms.

This last effort was followed by a mortal throe, and he fell back again
stiff and lifeless; his eyes starting from their orbits, whilst fierce
convulsions were visible on his features, unnaturally distorted; a
bloody foam on his lips; his voice hoarse and strangling, like that of
a person in hydrophobia, for, in its last paroxysm, this fearful malady
shows the same symptoms as madness. The breath of this monster was
extinguished in the midst of a final and horrible vision, for he
stammered forth these words, "Black night!--black spectres!--skeletons
of brass, red-hot with fire! Unfold me! Their burning fingers make my
flesh smoke; my marrow is scorched! Fleshless, horrid spectre! No--no!
Cecily--fire--flame--agony--Cecily!"

These were Jacques Ferrand's last words, and Rodolph left the place
overcome with horror.




CHAPTER IV.

THE HOSPITAL.


It will be remembered that Fleur-de-Marie, saved by La Louve, had been
conveyed not far from the Isle du Ravageur to the country-house of
Doctor Griffon, one of the surgeons of the hospital, to whom we shall
now introduce the reader. This learned doctor, who had obtained from
high influence his position in the hospital, considered the wards as a
kind of school of experiments, where he tried on the poor the remedies
and applications which he afterwards used with his rich clients.

These terrible experiments were, indeed, a human sacrifice made on the
altar of science; but Doctor Griffon did not think of that. In the eyes
of this prince of science, as they say in our days, the hospital
patients were only a matter of study and experiment; and as, after all,
there resulted from his essays occasionally a useful fact or a discovery
acquired by science, the doctor showed himself as ingenuously satisfied
and triumphant as a general after a victory which has been costly in
soldiers.

Nothing could be more melancholy than the sombre appearance of the vast
ward of the hospital, into which we now introduce the reader. The length
of its high, dark walls, pierced here and there with grated windows like
those of a prison, was filled with two rows of beds parallel, and
faintly lighted by the sepulchral glare of a lamp hanging from the
ceiling. The atmosphere is so nauseous, so heavy, that the fresh
patients frequently did not become accustomed to it without danger, and
this increase of suffering is a sort of tax which every newcomer
invariably pays for his miserable sojourn in the hospital. In one of the
beds was the corpse of a patient who had just died.

Amongst the females who did not sleep, and who had been present whilst
the priest performed the last rites with the dying woman, were three
persons whose names have been already mentioned in this history,--Mlle.
de Fermont, the daughter of the unfortunate widow ruined by the cupidity
of Jacques Ferrand; La Lorraine, the poor laundress, to whom
Fleur-de-Marie had formerly given the small sum of money she had left;
and Jeanne Duport, the sister of Pique-Vinaigre.

La Lorraine was a woman about twenty, with mild and regular features,
but extremely pale and thin; she was consumptive to the last degree, and
there was no hope of saving her. She was aware of her condition, and was
slowly dying.

"There is another gone!" said La Lorraine, in a faint voice, and
speaking to herself. "She will suffer no more; she is very happy!"

"She is very happy if she has no children!" added Jeanne.

"Aren't you asleep, neighbour?" asked La Lorraine. "How are you after
your first night here? Last night, when you came in, they made you go to
bed directly, and I dared not speak to you, because I heard you sob so."

"Yes, I cried a good deal; but I went to sleep at last, and only awoke
when the noise of the doors roused me; and when the priest and the
sisters came in and knelt down; I saw it was some woman who was dying,
and I said a _Pater_ and _Ave_ for her."

"And so did I; and, as I am ill with the same complaint as she had, I
could not help crying out, 'There is one who suffers no more; she is
very happy!'"

"Yes, as I said, if she has no children."

"Then you have children?"

"Three!" said Pique-Vinaigre's sister with a sigh. "And you?"

"I had a little girl, but I did not keep her long. The poor babe was
injured before she was born,--and I was so wretched during my pregnancy!
I am a washerwoman in the boats, and worked as long as I could. But
everything has an end, and when my strength failed me, bread failed me
also. They turned me out of my lodging; and I do not know what would
have become of me if a poor woman had not taken me into a cellar, where
she was hiding from her husband, who had sworn he would kill her. There
I was brought to bed on the straw; but, thanks to goodness, the good
woman knew a young girl as good and charitable as an angel from heaven.
This young girl had a little money, and took me from the cellar, and put
me in a furnished room, where she paid a month in advance, and gave me,
besides, a wicker cradle for my baby, and forty francs, with a little
linen besides. Thanks to her, I was enabled to resume my work."

"Kind girl! Well, and I, also, met by chance with such another, a young,
hard-working sempstress. I was going to see my poor brother, who is a
prisoner," said Jeanne, after a moment's hesitation, "and met this
work-girl in the prison; and when she heard me tell my brother that I
was not happy, she came to me and offered me all in her power, poor
girl! I accepted her offer, and she gave me her address; and two days
afterwards dear little Mlle. Rigolette--she is called Rigolette--sent me
an order."

"Rigolette!" exclaimed Lorraine; "how strange! The young girl who was so
generous to me often mentioned the name of Mlle. Rigolette in my
hearing; they were great friends."

"Well, then," said Jeanne, smiling sadly, "since we are neighbours in
bed, we should be friends like our two benefactresses."

"With all my heart! My name is Annette Gerbier, called La Lorraine, a
washerwoman."

"And I am Jeanne Duport, a fringe-maker. Oh, it is so fortunate to find
in this melancholy place some one not quite a stranger to you,
especially when you come for the first time, and are very full of
trouble. But don't let us talk of that! Tell me, Lorraine, what was the
name of the young girl who was so kind to you?"

"She was called Goualeuse, and was exceedingly handsome, with light
brown hair and blue eyes, so soft--oh, so soft! Unfortunately, in spite
of her assistance, my poor babe died at two months old. It was so puny,
it could hardly breathe!" and La Lorraine wiped a tear from her eye.

"And your husband?"

"I am not married. I washed by the day at a rich tradesman's in my
country, and had always been prudent; but the master's son whispered his
tales in my ear, and then--When I found in what a state I was, I dared
not remain any longer in the country, and M. Jules gave me fifty francs
to take me to Paris, assuring me that he would send me twenty francs
every month for my lying-in; but since I left I have not had one sou,
not even a message. I wrote to him once, but he sent me no answer; and I
was afraid to write again, as I saw he did not wish to hear any more of
me."

"At least he ought not to have forgotten you, if it was only for the
sake of the child!"

"That was the reason; he was angry with me for being in the family way,
because it embarrassed him. I regret my child for myself, but not on its
own account, poor little darling! It must have been miserable, and have
been an orphan very early, for I have not long to live."

"Oh, you ought not to have such ideas at your age. Have you been long
ill?"

"Nearly three months. Why, when I had to work for myself and my child, I
began too soon. The winter was very cold; I was attacked with a cold on
my chest. I lost my child at this time, too; and nursing her, I
neglected myself, and then my sorrow; so that I fell into a
consumption--decided--like the actress who has just died."

"There's always hope at your age!"

"The actress was only two years older than I am."

"What, was she an actress who is just dead?"

"Yes. And see what fate is! She had been as beautiful as daylight, and
had money, carriages, diamonds; but, unfortunately, the smallpox
disfigured her, and then came want and misery, and, at last, death in a
hospital. No one ever came to see her; and yet, four or five days ago,
she told me, she had written to a gentleman whom she had formerly known
in her gay days, and who had been much in love with her. She wrote to
him to beg him to claim her dead body, because she was wretched at the
idea of thinking she would be dissected--cut in pieces."

"And did the gentleman come?"

"No. Every moment she was asking for him and perpetually saying, 'Oh,
he'll come! Oh, he'll be sure to come!' And yet she died without any one
coming, and what she so much dreaded will befall her poor frame. After
having been rich and happy, to die so is very terrible! We, at least,
only change our miseries!"

"I wish," said Lorraine, after a moment's hesitation, "I wish you would
render me a service!"

"What is it?"

"If I die, as is probable, before you go from here, will you claim my
body? I have the same dread as the actress, and have laid aside the
small sum of money necessary to bury me."

"Oh, do not have such ideas!"

"Still promise me, all the same!"

"But let us hope the case will not happen!"

"Yes; but if it does happen--thanks to you, I shall not have the same
misery as the actress."

"Poor woman! After having been rich to come to such an end!"

"The actress is not the only one in this room who has been rich."

"Who else?"

"A young girl of about fifteen or so, brought here yesterday evening.
She was so weak that they were obliged to support her. The sister said
that the young lady and her mother were very reputable persons, who had
been ruined."

"And is her mother here, too?"

"No, the mother was too ill to be moved. The poor girl would not leave,
so they took advantage of her fainting to convey her. The proprietor of
a wretched lodging-house, for fear they should die in his rooms, made
the report at the police station. She is there--in the bed opposite
you."

"And she is fifteen? The age of my eldest girl!" And Jeanne Duport wept
bitterly.

"Pardon me," said La Lorraine, "if I have given you pain unconsciously
in speaking of your children! Are they, too, ill?"

"Alas! I do not know. What will become of them if I remain here for a
week?"

"And your husband?"

"As we are friends together, Lorraine, I will tell you my troubles, as
you have told me yours, and that will comfort me. My husband was an
excellent workman, but became dissipated, and forsook me and my
children, after having sold everything we possessed. I went to work;
some good souls aided me, and I began to get easy again, and was
bringing up my little family as well as I could, when my husband
returned with a vile creature, his mistress, and again stripped me of
everything; and so I had to begin all over again."

"Poor Jeanne! You could not help it."

"I ought to have separated myself from him in law,--but, as my brother
says, the law is too dear! I went to see my brother one day, and he gave
me three francs, which he had collected amongst the prisoners on telling
his tales. So I took courage, believing my husband would not return for
a very long time, as he had taken all he could from us. But I was
mistaken," added the poor creature, with a shudder; "there was my poor
Catherine still to take!"

"Your daughter?"

"You will hear--you will hear! Three days ago, as I was at work with my
children around me, my husband came in. I saw by his look that he had
been drinking. 'I have come for Catherine,' says he. I took my
daughter's arm, and I said to Duport, 'Where do you want to take her
to?' 'What's that to you? She's my daughter. Let her make up her bundle
and come along with me.' At these words my blood ran cold in my veins;
for you must know, Lorraine, that that bad woman is still with my
husband, and it makes me shudder all over to say it. But so it was; she
had long been urging him to earn something by our daughter, who is young
and pretty. 'Take away Catherine?' said I to Duport; 'Never! I know what
that wicked woman would do with her.' 'I say,' said my husband, whose
lips were white with rage, 'do not oppose me or I'll kill you!' and then
he seized my daughter by the arm, saying, 'Come along, Catherine!' The
poor child threw her arms around my neck, and burst into tears,
exclaiming, 'I will stay with mother!' When he saw this, Duport became
furious, tore my daughter from me, and hit me a blow in my stomach,
which knocked me down; and when I was on the ground--he was very drunk,
you may be sure--he trampled on me and hurt me dreadfully. My poor
children begged for mercy on their knees,--Catherine, too; and then he
said to her, swearing like a lunatic, 'If you will not come with me I'll
do for your mother!' I was spitting blood; I felt half dead, and could
not move an inch. But I cried to Catherine, 'Let him kill me first!'
'What, you won't be quiet?' said Duport, giving me another kick, which
deprived me of all consciousness; and when I returned to myself, I found
my two little boys crying bitterly."

"And your daughter?"

"Gone!" exclaimed the unhappy mother, with convulsive sobs. "Yes; gone.
My other children told me that their father had beaten them and
threatened to finish me. Then the poor girl was quite distracted and
embraced me and her brothers, weeping dreadfully; and then my husband
dragged her away. Ah, that bad woman was waiting for him on the stairs,
I know!"

"And didn't you complain to the police?"

"At first I felt only grief at Catherine's departure; but I felt soon
great pain in all my limbs,--I could not walk. Alas, what I had so long
dreaded had happened! Yes, I told my brother that one day my husband
would beat me so that I should be obliged to go to the hospital,--and
then what would become of my children? And now here I am in the
hospital, and what, indeed, will become of my children? The neighbours
went for the commissary, who came. I didn't like to denounce Duport, but
I was obliged, in consequence of my daughter; only I said that in our
quarrel about our daughter he had pushed me, that it was nothing, but I
wanted my daughter Catherine because I feared the bad woman with whom my
husband lived would be the ruin of her."

"Well, and what did the commissary say?"

"Why, that my husband had a right to take away his daughter, as we were
not separated; that it would be a misfortune if my daughter turned out
badly from evil counsels, but that they were only suppositions, after
all, and that was not sufficient for a complaint against my husband.
'You have but one way--plead in the courts, demand a separation--and
then the beatings your husband has given you, his behaviour with a vile
woman, will be in your favour, and they will force him to restore your
daughter to you; but, otherwise, he has a right to keep her with him.'
'But how can I plead when I have my children to feed?' 'What can be
done?' said the clerk; 'that's the only way!'" and poor Jeanne sobbed
bitterly, adding, "And he is right--that is the only way! And so, in
three months, my daughter may be walking the streets, whilst if I could
plead and be separated it would not happen. Alas, poor Catherine, so
gentle and so affectionate!"

"Oh, you have, indeed, a bitter sorrow; and yet I was complaining!" said
La Lorraine, drying her eyes. "And your other children?"

"Why, on their account, I did all I could to bear the pains I was
suffering, and not go to the hospital; but I could not go on. I vomited
blood three or four times a day, and a fever took away the use of my
arms and legs, and I was at last unable to work. If I am quickly cured I
may return to my children, if they are not first dead from hunger or
locked up as beggars. Who will maintain them whilst I am here?"

"Oh, it is very terrible! Have you no kind neighbours?"

"They are as poor as myself, and have five children already. It is very
hard, but they promised to do a little something for them for a week;
that is all they could do. And so, cured or not cured, I must go out in
a week."

"But your friend, Mademoiselle Rigolette?"

"Unfortunately, she is in the country, and going to be married, the
porter said. No, I must be cured in eight days; and I asked all the
doctors who spoke to me yesterday, but they laughed as they replied,
'You must ask the principal surgeon.' When will he come, Lorraine?"

"Hush! I think I hear him now. And no one is allowed to speak during his
visit," replied Lorraine, in a low voice.

The daylight had appeared during the conversation of the two women. A
bustle announced the arrival of Doctor Griffon, who entered the room
accompanied by his friend, the Comte de Saint-Remy, who took so warm an
interest in Madame de Fermont and her daughter, but was very far from
expecting to find the unfortunate young lady in the hospital. As he
entered the ward, the cold and harsh features of Doctor Griffon seemed
to expand. Casting around him a look of satisfaction and authority, he
answered the obsequious reception of the sisters by a protecting nod.
The coarse and austere countenance of the old Comte de Saint-Remy was
imprinted with the deepest sorrow. His ineffective attempts to find any
traces of Madame de Fermont, and the ignominious baseness of the
vicomte, who had preferred a life of infamy to death, overwhelmed him
with grief.

"Well," said Doctor Griffon to him, with an air of triumph, "what do you
think of my hospital?"

"Really," replied M. de Saint-Remy, "I do not know why I yielded to your
desire; nothing is more harrowing than the sight of rooms filled with
sick persons. Since I entered, my feelings have been severely
distressed."

"Bah, bah! In a quarter of an hour you will think no more of it. You,
who are a philosopher, will find here ample matter for observation; and
besides, it would have been a shame for you, one of my oldest friends,
not to have known the theatre of my glory, my labours, and seen me at
work. I take pride in my profession--is that wrong?"

"No, certainly; and after your excellent care of Fleur-de-Marie, whom
you have saved, I could refuse you nothing."

"Well, have you ascertained anything as to the fate of Madame de Fermont
and her daughter?"

"Nothing!" replied M. de Saint-Remy, with a sigh. "And my last hope is
in Madame d'Harville, who takes such deep interest in these two
unfortunates; she may find some traces of them. Madame d'Harville, I
hear, is expected daily at her house; and I have written to her on the
subject, begging her to reply as soon as possible."

During the conversation between M. de Saint-Remy and Doctor Griffon,
several groups were formed gradually around a large table in the middle
of the apartment, on which was a register in which the pupils of the
hospital (who were to be recognised by their long white aprons) came in
their turns to sign the attendance-sheet.

"You see, my dear Saint-Remy, that my staff is pretty considerable."

"It is indeed! But all these beds are occupied by women, and the
presence of so many men must inspire them with painful confusion!"

"All these fine feelings must be left at the door, my dear Alcestis.
Here we begin on the living those experiments and studies which we
complete on the dead body in the amphitheatre."

"Doctor, you are one of the best and worthiest of men, and I owe you my
life, and I recognise all your excellent qualities; but the practice and
love of your art makes you take views of certain questions which are
most revolting to me. I leave you. These are things which disgust and
pain me; and I foresee that it would be a real punishment to me to be
present at your visit. I will wait for you here at the table."

"What a strange person you are with these scruples! But I will not let
you have quite your own way. So remain here till I come for you."

"Now, then, gentlemen," said Doctor Griffon; and he began his round,
followed by his numerous auditory.

On reaching the first bed on the right hand, the curtains of which were
closed, the sister said to the doctor:

"Sir, No. 1 died at half past four o'clock this morning."

"So late? It astonishes me. Yesterday morning I would not have given her
the day through. Has her body been claimed?"

"No, sir."

"So much the better. It is a very fine one; we will not dissect it, but
I will make a man happy." Then turning to one of the pupils, "My dear
Dunoyer, you have long desired a subject; your name is down for the
first, and it is yours."

"Oh, sir, you are too good."

"I am only desirous of rewarding your zeal, my dear fellow; but mark the
subject--take possession; there are so many who covet it."

As the doctor passed onwards, the pupil, with his scalpel, incised very
delicately an F. and D. (his initials) on the arm of the defunct
actress, in order "to take possession," as the doctor termed it. And the
round continued.

"Lorraine," said Jeanne Duport, in a low voice, to her neighbour, "who
is all this crowd of people with the surgeon?"

"It is pupils and students."

"Oh, will all these young men look on whilst the doctor asks me
questions and examines me?"

"Alas, yes!"

"But it is in my chest that I am ill; will they examine me before all
these men?"

"Yes--yes--it must be so. I cried bitterly the first time, and thought
I should have died of shame. I resisted, and they threatened to send me
away, and that made me so ill. Only imagine, almost naked before
everybody! It is very painful."

"Before the doctor alone I can easily comprehend it is necessary, and
even that is a great deal to submit to; but why before all these young
men?"

"They learn and practise on us; that is why we are here,--why they admit
us into the hospital."

"Ah, I understand," said Jeanne Duport, with bitterness; "they give us
nothing for nothing. Yet still there are times when even that could not
be. Suppose my poor girl Catherine, who is only fifteen, were to come to
the hospital, would they dare with her, before so many young men,
to--Oh, no! I would rather see her die at home!"

"Oh, if she came here she must make up her mind to do as the others
do,--as you and I. But hold your tongue; if the poor young lady in front
hears you--they say she was rich, and, perhaps, has never left her
mother before,--and yet her turn comes now. Only think how confused and
distressed she will be."

"I shudder when I think of her! Poor child!"

"Hush, Jeanne! Here is the doctor!" said Lorraine.

After having quickly visited several patients who presented nothing
remarkable in their cases, the doctor at last came to Jeanne. At the
sight of this crowd coming around her bed, anxious to see and learn, the
poor creature, overcome with fear and shame, pulled the bed-clothes
tightly around her. The severe and meditative countenance of the doctor,
his penetrating glance, his eyebrows, always drawn down by his
reflective habit, his abrupt mode of speech, impatient and quick,
increased the alarm of poor Jeanne.

"A new subject!" said the doctor, as he read the placard in which was
inscribed the nature of the patient's malady, and throwing on Jeanne a
lengthened look of scrutiny. There was a profound silence amongst the
assistants, who, in imitation of the prince of science, fixed a
scrutinising glance on the patient. After an examination of several
minutes, the doctor, remarking something wrong in the yellow tint of the
patient's eyeball, approached her more closely, and, raising the lid
with his finger, examined it silently. Then several of the students,
responding to the kind of mute invitation of their professor, drew near,
and gazed at Jeanne's eye with attention. The doctor then began:

"Your name?"

"Jeanne Duport," she murmured, more and more alarmed.

"Are you married?"

"Alas, yes, sir!" with a profound sigh.

"Have you any children?"

Here, instead of replying, the poor mother gave way to a flood of tears.

"It is no use crying,--answer! Have you any children?"

"Yes, sir,--two little boys, and a girl of sixteen."

Then followed a string of questions impossible to repeat, but to which
Jeanne could only reply in stammering, and after many severe rebukes
from the doctor. The poor woman was overwhelmed with shame, compelled as
she was to reply aloud to such questions before such a numerous
auditory.

The doctor, completely absorbed by scientific feelings, did not give the
smallest heed to Jeanne's distress, and continued:

"How long have you been ill?"

"Four days, sir," replied Jeanne, drying her tears.

"Tell us how your illness first disclosed itself."

"Sir,--why,--there are so many persons here, that I dare not."

"Pooh! Where do you come from, my dear woman?" inquired the doctor,
impatiently; "would you like to have a confessional brought? Come, come,
make haste!"

"Sir, these are family matters."

"Oh, be easy, we are all family men here; a large family, too, as you
see," added the prince of science, who was in very high spirits that
day. "Come, come, let us have an end of this."

More and more alarmed, Jeanne, stammering and hesitating at each moment,
said:

"I had--a quarrel with my husband--about the children; I mean my eldest
daughter, that he wanted to take away; and I wouldn't agree, because of
a wicked woman he lived with, and who might give bad advice to my
daughter. So then, my husband, who was tipsy,--yes, sir,--for if not,
he'd never have done it,--my husband gave me a very hard push, and I
fell; and then, soon after, I began to vomit blood."

"Pooh, pooh, pooh! Your husband pushed you, and you fell; you describe
it very nicely! Why, he did more than push you; he must have struck you
in the stomach; perhaps trampled on you, or kicked you? Come,
answer,--let's have the truth."

"Oh, sir, I assure you that he was tipsy; but for that he would never
have been so wicked."

"Good or wicked, drunk or sober, it is not to the purpose, my good
woman. I am not a public officer, and only want a fact accurately
described. Now, were you not knocked down, and trampled under foot?"

"Yes!" said Jeanne, weeping; "and yet I never gave him any cause of
complaint. I worked as long as I could, and--"

"The epigastrium must be very painful. Don't you feel great heat around
that region?--uneasiness, lassitude, nausea?"

"Yes, sir. I was quite worn out when I gave up, if not, I should never
have left my children; and then, my Catherine! Oh, if you--"

"Put out your tongue," said the doctor, again interrupting the patient.

This appeared so strange to Jeanne, who thought to excite the doctor's
pity, that she did not reply immediately, but looked at him with alarm.

"Show me your tongue, which you know so well how to use," said the
doctor, with a smile; and he pushed down Jeanne's lower jaw with the end
of his finger. After having had his pupils successively, and for some
time, feel and examine the subject's tongue, in order to ascertain its
colour and dryness, Jeanne, overcoming her fear for a moment, said, in a
tremulous voice:

"Sir, I was going to say to you, my neighbours, who are as poor as
myself, have been so kind as to take care of my children for a week
only, which is a great deal; so at the end of that time I must be back
home again. So I beg of you, in God's name, to cure me as quickly as you
can, or nearly so, that I may return to work; and I have but a week
before me,--for--"

"Discoloured face,--complete state of prostration,--yet the pulse
strong, quick, and regular," said the doctor, imperturbably, and
pointing to Jeanne. "Remark her well, gentlemen: oppression, heat in the
epigastric regions. All these symptoms certainly betoken hæmatemesis,
probably complicated by hepatitis, caused by domestic troubles, as is
indicated by the yellow discoloration of the eyeball. The subject has
had violent blows in the regions of the epigastrium and abdomen; the
vomiting blood is the necessary consequence of some organic injury to
the viscera. On this point let me call your attention to a very curious,
remarkably curious, feature. The post-mortem appearances of those who
die of the injuries under which the subject is suffering frequently
present remarkable appearances; frequently the malady, very severe and
very dangerous, carries off the patient in a few days, and then no trace
of it is found."

Doctor Griffon then, throwing off the bed-clothes, nearly denuded poor
Jeanne. It would be repugnant to describe the struggle of the
unfortunate creature, who, in her shame, implored the doctor and his
auditory. But at the threat, "You will be turned out of the hospital, if
you do not submit to the established usages,"--a threat so terrible for
those to whom the hospital is the sole and last refuge,--Jeanne
submitted to a public scrutiny, which lasted a long time, very long, for
Doctor Griffon analysed and explained every symptom; and then the most
studious of the pupils declared their wish to unite practice with
theory, and also examine the patient. The end of this scene was that
poor Jeanne felt such extreme emotion that she fell into a nervous
crisis, for which Doctor Griffon gave an extra prescription.

The round continued, and the doctor soon reached the bed of Mlle. Claire
de Fermont, a victim, like her mother, to the cupidity of Jacques
Ferrand.

Mlle, de Fermont, dressed in a cap of the hospital, was leaning her head
languidly on the bolster of the bed. In spite of the ravages of her
malady, there might be detected on her open and sweet countenance the
traces of a beauty full of distinction. After a night of keen anguish,
the poor girl had fallen into a kind of feverish stupor, and when the
doctor and his scientific train entered the ward she was not aroused by
the noise.

"Another first subject, gentlemen," said the prince of science.
"Disease, a slow nervous fever; if the receiving surgeon is not mistaken
in the symptoms, this is a real godsend. For a long time I have desired
a slow nervous fever, for that is not an ordinary complaint amongst the
poor. These affections are usually produced after severe trouble in the
social position of the subject, and I need hardly add that the higher
the position of the patient, the more deep is the disease. It is,
moreover, a complaint the more remarkable from its peculiar
characteristics. It is traced to the very remotest antiquity, and the
writings of Hippocrates have no doubt reference to it. This fever, I
repeat, has almost always been produced from the most violent grief, and
grief is as old as the world. Yet, strange to say, before the eighteenth
century, this disease was never accurately described by any author; it
was Huxham, whom the science of medicine of the age so highly
honours,--Huxham, I say, who first defined accurately nervous fever; and
yet it is a malady of the olden time," added the doctor, jocosely. "Eh,
eh, eh! It belongs to the great, antique, and illustrious family of
_febris_, whose origin is lost in the darkness of ages. But we may be
rejoicing too soon; let us see if really we have the good fortune to
possess here a sample of this curious affection; it would be doubly
desirable, inasmuch as, for a very long time, I have been anxious to try
the effect of the internal use of phosphorus. Yes, gentlemen," continued
the doctor, hearing amongst his auditory a kind of shudder of
curiosity,--"yes, gentlemen, of phosphorus; it is a singular experiment
that I wish to try, and a bold one, and but _audaces fortuna juvat_, and
the opportunity would be excellent. We will first try if the subject
offers in all parts of the body, and particularly in the chest, that
miliary eruption, so symptomatic according to Huxham, and you will
assure yourselves, by feeling the subject, of the kind of uneven surface
which this eruption produces. But do not let us sell the skin of our
bear before we have killed it," added the prince of science, who was
decidedly in very high spirits. And he shook Mlle. de Fermont's shoulder
very gently, in order to wake her.

The young girl started and opened her large eyes, hollowed by the
malady. It is impossible to describe her amaze and alarm. Whilst a crowd
of men surrounded her bed, all fixing their eyes upon her, she felt the
doctor's hand gliding under the quilt into her bed, in order to take
her hand and feel her pulse. Mlle. de Fermont, collecting all her
strength, in a cry of anguish, exclaimed:

"Mother! Help! Mother! Mother!"

By an almost providential chance, at the moment when the cries of Mlle.
de Fermont made the old Count de Saint-Remy spring from his chair, for
he recognised the voice, the door of the apartment opened, and a young
lady, dressed in mourning, entered very hastily, accompanied by the
governor of the hospital; this lady was the Marquise d'Harville.

"I beg of you, sir," she said to him, "to lead me to Mlle. de Fermont."

"Be so kind as to follow me," he replied, respectfully; "the young lady
is in No. 17."

"Unhappy girl! Here--here!" said Madame d'Harville, drying her tears.
"Ah, this is really frightful!"

The marquise, preceded by the governor, rapidly approached the group
assembled beside the bed of Mlle. de Fermont, when they heard these
words uttered with indignation:

"I tell you it is infamous murder; you will kill her, sir!"

"But, my dear Saint-Remy, do pray hear me!"

"I repeat, sir, that your conduct is atrocious! I consider Mlle. de
Fermont as my daughter, and I forbid you going near her; I will have her
immediately removed hence."

"But, my dear friend, it is a case of slow nervous fever, very rare; I
am desirous of trying phosphorus. It is a unique occasion. Promise me,
at least, that I shall have the care of her, and take her where you
like, since you are determined to deprive us of so valuable a clinical
subject."

"If you were not a madman, you would be a monster!" replied the count.

Clémence listened to these words with increasing anguish, but the crowd
was so dense around the bed that the governor was obliged to say, in a
loud voice:

"Make way, if you please, for the Marquise d'Harville, who has come to
see No. 17."

At these words, the pupils made way with equal haste and respectful
admiration when they saw Clémence's lovely face, which was radiant with
so much emotion.

"Madame d'Harville!" exclaimed the Count de Saint-Remy, pushing the
doctor rudely aside, and going hastily towards Clémence. "Ah, it is God
who sends one of his angels here! Madame, I knew you took an interest in
these two unfortunate beings, and, more happy than me, you have found
them, whilst it was chance only that led me hither, to be present at a
scene of unparalleled barbarity. Unhappy child! See, madame; and you,
gentlemen, in the name of your sisters and daughters, have pity, I
entreat, on a girl of sixteen, and leave her alone with madame and these
good sisters; when she recovers her senses, I will have her conveyed
hence."

"Very well, let it be so; I will sign her discharge!" exclaimed the
doctor; "but I will not lose sight of her; she is a subject of mine, and
I will attend her, do what you will. I'll not risk the phosphorus, I
promise that; but I will pass my nights, if needs be, as I passed them
with you, ungrateful Saint-Remy, for this fever is as curious as yours
was; they are two sisters, who have an equal right to my interest."

"Confound the man! Why has he so much science?" said the count, knowing
that he could not confide the young girl to more able hands.

"Eh! It is simple enough," said the doctor, in a whisper. "I have a
great deal of science because I study, because I experimentalise,
because I risk and practise a great deal on my subjects; and so, old
fellow, I shall still have my slow nervous fever,--eh?"

"Yes; but is it safe to move this young girl?"

"Certainly."

"Then, for the love of heaven, disappear with your train!"

"Come, gentlemen," said the prince of science, "we shall be deprived of
a precious study; but I will make my reports on it to you." And Doctor
Griffon, with his suite, continued his round, leaving M. de Saint-Remy
and Madame d'Harville with Mlle. de Fermont.

During this scene, Mlle. de Fermont, still in a swoon, had been attended
to by Clémence and the two nuns. Saint-Remy said in a low tone to
Clémence:

"And the mother of this unhappy girl, madame?"

The marchioness replied, in a voice deeply affected:

"She has no longer a mother, sir. I learnt yesterday only, on my return,
the address of Madame de Fermont, and her dying condition; at one
o'clock in the morning I went to her with a medical man. Ah, sir, what a
fiction! It was misery in all its horror! And no hope of saving the poor
mother, whose last words were, 'My daughter!'"

"What a death! Good heaven! And she so tender, so devoted a mother,--it
is frightful!"

"I will watch her until she can be moved," said Clémence, "and, when she
can be removed, I will take her with me."

"Ah, madame, bless you for what you say and do!" said M. de Saint-Remy.
"But excuse me for not having before mentioned my name to you, I am the
Comte de Saint-Remy; Madame de Fermont's husband was my most intimate
friend. I live at Angers, and left that city from uneasiness at not
receiving any news of these two noble and excellent women; they had
until then lived in that city, and were said to be completely ruined,
which was the more terrible as until then they had lived in ease and
plenty."

"Ah, sir! you do not know all; Madame de Fermont was shamefully robbed."

"By her notary, perhaps? I had my suspicions."

"That man was a monster, sir! Alas! that was not the only crime he
committed; but fortunately," said Clémence, with excitement, as she
thought of Rodolph, "a providential genius had compelled him to do
justice, and I was enabled to close Madame de Fermont's eyes, assuring
her as to the future provision for her daughter; thus her death was
rendered less cruel."

"I understand; knowing her daughter to have your support henceforth, my
poor friend died more tranquil."

"Not only is my interest excited for ever towards Mlle. de Fermont, but
her fortune will be restored to her."

"Her fortune! The notary--"

"Has been compelled to refund the money. This man had caused the
assassination of Madame de Fermont's brother, in order to make it appear
that the unhappy man had committed suicide, after having dissipated his
sister's fortune; but he has now placed the sum in the hands of the
worthy curé of Bonne-Nouvelle, and it will be given to Mlle. de Fermont.
The infamous wretch has committed another murder equally infamous!"

"What mean you, madame?"

"But a few days since he got rid of an unfortunate young girl, whom he
had an interest in drowning, assured that her death would be attributed
to accident."

M. de Saint-Remy started, looked at Madame d'Harville with surprise, as
he recollected Fleur-de-Marie, and exclaimed:

"Ah, madame, what a singular coincidence! This young girl they sought to
drown--"

"In the Seine, near Asnières, as I am told."

"'Tis she! 'Tis she!" cried Saint-Remy.

"Of whom do you speak, sir?"

"Of the young girl whom this monster sought to drown. Do you know her,
madame?"

"Poor dear! I love her tenderly. Ah, if you knew, sir, how lovely, how
prepossessing she was! But tell me what you mean."

"Doctor Griffon and I gave her the first assistance."

"First assistance to her! And in what way?"

"At the Isle du Ravageur, where she was saved."

"Saved! Fleur-de-Marie saved?"

"By a worthy creature, who, at the risk of her life, saved her from the
Seine. But what ails you, madame?"

"Ah, sir, I fear to believe in such good fortune; but, I pray of you,
tell me what is the appearance of this young girl?"

"Singularly beautiful!"

"Large, blue eyes,--light brown hair?"

"Yes, madame."

"And when she was drowned, there was an elderly woman with her?"

"It was only yesterday she was well enough to speak, and she is still
very weak; she said an elderly woman accompanied her."

"Praised be Heaven!" said Clémence, clasping her hands with fervour; "I
can now tell him that his protégée still lives! What joy for him who, in
his last letter, spoke to me of this poor child with such bitter
regrets! Excuse me, sir, but you know not how happy your intelligence
renders me, and will make a person who, more than myself, has loved and
protected Fleur-de-Marie. But, for mercy's sake, tell me, where is she
at this moment?"

"Near Asnières, in the house of one of the surgeons of this hospital,
Doctor Griffon; she was taken there, and has had every attention."

"And is she out of danger?"

"Yes, madame, but only during the last two or three days, and to-day she
will be permitted to write to her protector."

"Oh, I will undertake to do that, sir; or, rather, I shall have the
pleasure of taking her to those who, believing her dead, regret her so
bitterly!"

"I can understand those regrets, madame, for it is impossible to see
Fleur-de-Marie without being charmed with her grace and sweetness. The
woman who saved her, and has since watched her night and day as she
would an infant, is a courageous and devoted person, but of a
disposition so excitable that she has been called La Louve."

"I know La Louve," said the marquise, smiling as she thought of the
pleasure she had in store for the prince. What would have been her
ecstasy, had she known she was the daughter he believed dead that she
was about to restore to Rodolph! Then, addressing the nun who had given
some spoonfuls of a draught to Mlle. de Fermont, she said, "Well,
sister, is she recovering?"

"Not yet, madame, she is so weak. Poor, young thing! One can scarcely
feel her pulse beat."

"I will wait, then, until she is sufficiently restored to be put into my
carriage; but tell me, sister, amongst these unfortunate patients, do
you know any who particularly deserve interest and pity, and to whom I
could be useful before I leave the hospital?"

"Ah, madame, Heaven has sent you here!" said the sister. "There," and
she pointed to the bed of Pique-Vinaigre's sister, "is a poor woman much
to be pitied, and very bad; she only came in when quite exhausted, and
is past all comfort, because she has been obliged to abandon her two
small children, who have no other support in the world. She said just
now to the doctor that she must go out, cured or not, in a week, because
her neighbours had promised to take care of her children for that time
only and no longer."

"Take me to her bed, I beg of you, sister," said Madame d'Harville,
rising and following the nun.

Jeanne Duport, who had scarcely recovered from the violent shock which
the investigations of Doctor Griffon had caused her, had not remarked
the entrance of Madame d'Harville; what, then, was her astonishment,
when the marquise, lifting up the curtains of her bed, and looking at
her with great pity and kindness, said:

"My good woman, do not be uneasy about your children, I will take care
of them; so only think of getting well, that you may go to them."

Poor Jeanne thought she was in a dream, she could only clasp her hands
in speechless gratitude, and gaze on her unknown benefactress.

"Once again assure yourself, my worthy woman, and have no uneasiness,"
said the marquise, pressing in her small and delicate white hands the
burning hand of Jeanne Duport; "and, if you prefer it, you shall leave
the hospital this very day and be nursed at home; everything shall be
done for you, so that you need not leave your children; and, if your
lodging is unhealthy or too small, you shall have one found that is more
convenient and suitable, so that you may be in one room and your
children in another; you shall have a good nurse, who will watch them
whilst she attends to you, and when you entirely recover, if you are out
of work, I will take care that you are provided for until work comes,
and I will also take care of your children for the future."

"Ah, what do I hear?" said Jeanne Duport, all trembling and hardly
daring to look her benefactress in the face. "Why are so many kindnesses
showered on me? It is not possible! I leave the hospital, where I have
wept and suffered so much, and not leave my children again! Have a
nurse! Why, it is a miracle!"

"It is no miracle, my good woman," said Clémence, much affected. "What I
do for you," she added, blushing slightly at the remembrance of Rodolph,
"is inspired by a generous spirit, who has taught me to sympathise with
misfortune, and it is he whom you should thank."

"Ah, madame, I shall ever bless you!" said Jeanne, weeping.

"Well, then, you see, Jeanne," said Lorraine, much affected, "there are
also amongst the rich Rigolettes and Goualeuses with good hearts."

Madame d'Harville turned with much surprise towards Lorraine when she
heard her mention the two names.

"Do you know La Goualeuse and a young workwoman called Rigolette?" she
inquired of Lorraine.

"Yes, madame; La Goualeuse--good little angel!--did for me last year,
according to her small means, what you are going to do for Jeanne. Yes,
madame, and it does me good to say and repeat it to everybody, La
Goualeuse took me from a cellar in which I had been brought to bed on
the straw, and--dear, good girl!--placed me and my child in a room where
there was a good bed and a cradle; La Goualeuse spent the money from
pure charity, for she scarcely knew me, and was poor herself. But how
good it was! Was it not, madame?" said Lorraine.

"Yes, yes; charity from the poor to the poor is great and holy!" said
Clémence, with her eyes moistened by soft tears.

"It was the same with Mademoiselle Rigolette, who, according to her
little means as a sempstress," said Lorraine, "some days ago offered her
kind services to Jeanne."

"How singular!" said Clémence to herself, more and more affected, for
each of these two names, Goualeuse and Rigolette, reminded her of a
noble action of Rodolph. "And you, my child, what can I do for you?" she
said to Lorraine; "I could wish that the names you pronounce with so
much gratitude should also bring you good fortune."

"Thank you, madame," said Lorraine, with a smile of bitter resignation.
"I had a child, it is dead; I am in a decline and past all hope."

"What a gloomy idea! At your age there is always hope."

"Oh, no, madame, I saw a consumptive patient die last night. Yet as you
are so good, a great lady like you must be able to do anything."

"Tell me, what do you wish?"

"Since I have seen the actress who is dead so distressed at the idea of
being cut in pieces after her death, I have the same fear. Jeanne had
promised to claim my body, and have me buried."

"Ah, this is horrible!" said Clémence, shuddering. "Be tranquil,
although I hope the time is far distant, yet, when it comes, be assured
that your body shall rest in holy ground."

"Oh, thank you--thank you, madame!" exclaimed Lorraine. "Might I beg to
kiss your hand?"

Clémence presented her hand to the parched lips of Lorraine.

Half an hour afterwards, Madame d'Harville, who had been painfully
affected by Lorraine's condition, accompanied by M. de Saint-Remy, took
with her the young orphan, from whom she concealed her mother's death.

The same day, Madame d'Harville's man of business, after having obtained
favourable particulars respecting Jeanne Duport's character, hired for
her some large and airy rooms, and the same evening she was conveyed to
her new residence, where she found her children and a nurse. The same
individual was instructed to claim and inter the body of Lorraine when
she died. After having conveyed Mlle. de Fermont to her own house,
Madame d'Harville started for Asnières with M. de Saint-Remy, in order
to go to Fleur-de-Marie, and take her to Rodolph.




CHAPTER V.

HOPE.


Spring was approaching, and already the sun darted a more genial warmth,
the sky was blue and clear, while the balmy air seemed to bring life and
breath upon its invigorating wings. Among the many sick and suffering
who rejoiced in its cheering presence was Fleur-de-Marie, who, leaning
on the arm of La Louve, ventured to take gentle exercise in the little
garden belonging to Doctor Griffon's house; the vivifying rays of the
sun, added to the exertion of walking, tinged the pale, wasted
countenance of La Goualeuse with a faint glow that spoke of returning
convalescence. The dress she had worn when rescued from a watery grave
had been destroyed in the haste with which the requisite attempts had
been made for her resuscitation, and she now appeared in a loose
wrapping dress of dark blue merino, fastened around her slender waist by
worsted cord of the same colour as the robe.

"How cheering the sun shines!" said she to La Louve, as she stopped
beneath a thick row of trees, planted beside a high gravelled walk
facing the south, and on which was a stone bench. "Shall we sit down and
rest ourselves here a few minutes?"

"Why do you ask me?" replied La Louve, almost angrily; then taking off
her nice warm shawl, she folded it in four, and, kneeling down, placed
it on the ground, which was somewhat moist from the extreme shelter
afforded by the overhanging trees, saying, as she did so, "Here, put
your feet on this."

"Oh, but La Louve!" said Fleur-de-Marie, perceiving too late the kind
intention of her companion, "I cannot suffer you to spoil your beautiful
shawl in that way."

"Don't make a fuss about nothing; I tell you the ground is cold and
moist. There, that will do." And, taking the tiny feet of
Fleur-de-Marie, she forcibly placed them on her shawl.

"You spoil me terribly, La Louve."

"It is not for your good behaviour, if I do; always trying to oppose me
in everything I try to do for your good. Are you not very much tired? We
have been walking more than half an hour; I heard twelve o'clock just
strike from Asnières."

"I do feel rather weary, but still the walk has done me good."

"There now--you were tired, and yet could not tell me so!"

"Pray don't scold me; I assure you I was not conscious of my weariness
until I spoke. It is so delightful to be able to walk out in the air,
after being confined by sickness to your bed, to see the trees, the
green fields, and the beautiful country again, when you had given up all
hope of ever enjoying that happiness, or of feeling the warm beams of
the sun fill you with strength and hope!"

"Certainly, you were desperately ill, and for two days we despaired of
your life. I don't mind telling you, now the danger is over."

"Only imagine, La Louve, that, when I found myself in the water, I could
not help thinking of a very bad, wicked woman, who used to torment me
when I was young, and frighten me by threatening to throw me to the
fishes that they might eat me, and, even after I had grown up, she
wanted to drown me; and I kept thinking that it was my destiny to be
devoured by fishes, and that it was no use to try and escape from it."

"Was that really your last idea when you believed yourself perishing?"

"Oh, no!" replied Fleur-de-Marie, with enthusiasm; "when I believed I
was dying, my last thought was for him whom I so reverence, and to whom
I owe so much, and, when I came to myself after you had saved me, my
first thought was of him likewise."

"It is a pleasure to render you any service, you think so much of it."

"No, La Louve; the pleasure consists in falling asleep with our grateful
recollection of kind acts, and remembering them upon waking!"

"Ah, you would induce people to go through fire and water to serve you!
I'm sure I would, for one."

"I can assure you that one of the causes which made me thankful for life
was the hope of being able to advance your happiness. Do you recollect
the castles in the air we used to build at St. Lazare?"

"Oh, as for that, there is time enough to think about that."

"How delighted I should be, if the doctor would only allow me to write a
few lines to Madame Georges, I am sure she must be so very uneasy; and
so must M. Rodolph, too," added Fleur-de-Marie, pensively sighing.
"Perhaps they think me dead."

"As those wretches do who were set on to murder you!"

"Then you still believe my falling into the water was not an accident?"

"Accident! Yes, one of the Martial family's accidents;--mind, when I say
that, you must bear in mind that my Martial is not at all like the rest
of his relations, any more than François and Amandine."

"But what interest could they have had in my death?"

"I don't care for that; the Martials are such a vile set that they would
murder any one, provided they were well paid for it. A few words the
mother let drop when my man went to see her in prison prove that."

"Has he really been to see that dreadful woman?"

"Yes; and he tells me there is no hope of pardon for herself, Calabash,
or Nicholas. A great many things have been discovered against them; and
all the judges and those kind of people say they want to make a public
example of them, to frighten others from doing such things."

"How very shocking for nearly a whole family to perish in this way."

"And they certainly will, unless, indeed, Nicholas manages to make his
escape; he is in the same prison with a monstrous ruffian whom they call
the Skeleton, and this man is getting up a plot to escape with several
of his companions. Nicholas sent to tell Martial of this, by a prisoner
who was discharged from prison the other day, for I must tell you, my
man had been weak enough to go and see his brother in La Force; so,
encouraged by this visit, that hateful wretch Nicholas sent to tell my
man that he might effect his escape at any minute, and that his brother
was to send money and clothes to disguise himself in, ready for him, to
Father Micou's."

"Ah, your Martial is so kind-hearted, I'm sure he will do it!"

"A fig for such kind-heartedness! I call it downright foolery to help
the very man who tried to take his life. No, no, Martial shall do no
such thing; quite enough if he does not tell of the scheme for breaking
out of prison, without furnishing clothes and money, indeed. Besides,
now you are out of danger, myself, Martial, and the two children are
about to start on our rambles over France in search of work, and, depend
upon it, we never mean to set our feet in Paris again. Martial found it
quite galling enough to be called the son of a man who was guillotined;
how, then, could he endure being taunted with the disgraceful ends of
all his family?"

"Well, but, at least, you will defer your departure till I have been
enabled to see and speak with M. Rodolph; you have returned to virtue,
and I promised you a reward if you would but forsake evil ways, and I
wish to keep my word. You saved me from death, and, not satisfied with
that, have nursed me with the tenderest care during my severe illness."

"Suppose I did; well, it would seem as though I had done the little good
in my power for the sake of gain, were I to allow you to ask your
friends for anything for me! No, no; I say again, I am more than repaid
in seeing you safe and likely to do well."

"My kind Louve, make yourself perfectly easy; it shall not be said that
you were influenced by interested motives, but that I was desirous of
proving my gratitude to you."

"Hark!" said La Louve, hastily rising, "I fancy I hear the sound of a
carriage coming this way; yes--yes, there it is! Did you observe the
lady who was in it?"

"Dear me!" exclaimed Fleur-de-Marie, "I fancy I recognised a young and
beautiful lady I saw at St. Lazare."

"Then she knows you are here, does she?"

"I cannot tell you whether she does or no, but one thing is very
certain, that she is acquainted with the person I have so often
mentioned to you, who, if he pleases, and I hope that he will please,
can realise all those schemes of happiness we used to build when in
prison."

"What about getting a gamekeeper's place for my man?" asked La Louve,
with a sigh; "and a cottage in the middle of the woods for us all to
live in? Oh, no! That is too much like what we read of in fairy tales,
and quite impossible ever to happen to a poor creature like myself."

Quick steps were heard advancing rapidly from behind the trees, and in a
minute François and Amandine (who, thanks to the kind consideration of
the Count de Saint-Remy, had been permitted to remain with La Louve,
during her attendance on La Goualeuse) presented themselves, quite out
of breath, exclaiming:

"La Louve, here is a beautiful lady come along with M. de Saint-Remy to
see Fleur-de-Marie, and they want to see her directly!"

At the same moment, Madame d'Harville, accompanied by M. de Saint-Remy,
appeared from the side of the walk, the impatience of the former not
allowing her to wait the arrival of Fleur-de-Marie. Directly the
marquise saw her, she ran and embraced her, exclaiming:

"My poor dear child! What happiness does it not afford me to find you
thus in life and safety, when I believed you dead!"

"Be assured, madame," answered Fleur-de-Marie, as she gracefully and
modestly returned the affectionate pressure of Madame d'Harville, "that
I have equal pleasure in seeing again one whose former kindness has made
so deep an impression on my heart!"

"Ah, you little imagine the joy and rapture with which the intelligence
of your existence will be welcomed by those who have so bitterly
bewailed your supposed loss!"

Fleur-de-Marie, taking La Louve, who had withdrawn to a distance from
the affecting scene, by the hand, and presenting her to Madame
d'Harville, said:

"Since, madame, my benefactors are good enough to take so lively an
interest in my welfare and preservation, permit me to solicit their
kindness and favour for my companion, who saved my life at the expense
of her own."

"Make yourself perfectly easy on that score, my child; your friends will
amply testify to the worthy La Louve how fully they appreciate the
service they well know she has rendered you, and that 'tis to her they
owe the delight of seeing you again."

Confused and blushing, La Louve ventured neither to reply nor raise her
eyes towards Madame d'Harville, so completely did the presence of that
dignified person abash and overpower her. Yet, at hearing her very name
pronounced, La Louve could not restrain an exclamation of astonishment.

"But we have not a minute to lose," resumed the marquise. "I am dying
with impatience to carry off Fleur-de-Marie, and I have a cloak and warm
shawl for her in the carriage. So come, my child, come!" Then,
addressing the count, she said, "May I beg of you to give my address to
this brave woman, that she may be enabled to come to-morrow to say
good-bye to Fleur-de-Marie? That will oblige you to pay us a visit,"
continued Madame d'Harville, speaking to La Louve.

"Depend upon my coming, madame," replied the person addressed. "Since it
is to bid adieu to La Goualeuse, I should be grieved, indeed, if I were
to miss that last pleasure."

A few minutes after this conversation, Madame d'Harville and La
Goualeuse were on the road to Paris.

       *       *       *       *       *

After witnessing the frightful death by which Jacques Ferrand atoned for
the heinous offences of his past life, Rodolph had returned home deeply
agitated and affected. After passing a long and sleepless night, he sent
to summon Sir Walter Murphy, in order to relieve his overcharged heart
by confiding to this tried and trusty friend the overwhelmingly painful
discovery of the preceding evening relative to Fleur-de-Marie. The
honest squire was speechless with astonishment; he could well understand
the death-blow this must be to the prince's best affections, and as he
contemplated the pale, careworn countenance of his unhappy friend, whose
red, swollen eyes and convulsed features amply bespoke the agony of his
mind, he ransacked his brain for some gleam of comfort, and his
invention for words of hope and comfort.

"Take courage, my lord," said he at last, drying his eyes, which, spite
of all his accustomed coolness, he had not been able to prevent from
overflowing, "take courage; yours is indeed an infliction, one that
mocks at all vain attempts at consolation; it is deep, lasting, and
incurable!"

"You are right; what I felt yesterday seems as nothing to my sense of
misery to-day."

"Yesterday, my lord, you were stunned by the blow that fell on you, but
as your mind dwells more calmly on it, so does the future seem more dark
and dispiriting. I can but say, rouse yourself, my lord, to bear it with
courage, for it is beyond all attempts at consolation."

"Yesterday the contempt and horror I felt for that woman,--whom may the
Great Being pardon, before whose tribunal she now stands,--mingled with
surprise, disgust, and terror, occasioned by her hideous conduct,
repressed those bursts of despairing tenderness I can no longer restrain
in your sympathising presence, my faithful friend. I fear not to indulge
the natural emotions of my heart, and my hitherto pent-up tears may now
freely vent themselves. Forgive my weakness, and excuse my thus cowardly
shrinking from the trial I am called upon to endure, but it seems to
have riven my very heart-strings, and to have left me feeble as an
infant! Oh, my child! My loved, my lost child! Long must these scalding
tears flow ere I can forget you!"

"Ah, my lord, weep on, for your loss is indeed irreparable!"

"What joy to have atoned to her for all the wretchedness with which her
young days have been clouded! What bliss to have unfolded to her the
happy destiny that was to recompense her for all her past sorrows! And,
then, I should have used so much care and precaution in opening her eyes
to the brilliant lot that was to succeed her miserable youth, for the
tale, if told too abruptly, might have been too much for her delicate
nerves to sustain; but, no, I would by degrees have revealed to her the
history of her birth, and prepared her to receive me as her father!"

Then, again bursting into an agony of despair, Rodolph continued: "But
what avails all that I would have done, when I am tortured by the cruel
reflection that, when I had my child all to myself during the ill-fated
day I conducted her to the farm, when she so innocently displayed the
rich treasures of her pure and heavenly nature, no secret voice
whispered to me that in her I beheld my cherished and lamented daughter?
I might have prevented this dreadful calamity by keeping her with me
instead of sending her to Madame Georges. Oh, if I had, I should have
been spared my present sufferings, and needed only to have opened my
arms and folded her to my heart as my newly found treasure,--more really
great and noble by the beauty of her heart and mind, and perhaps more
worthy to fill the station to which I should raise her, than if she had
always been reared in opulence and with a knowledge of her rank! I alone
am to blame for her death; but mine is an accursed existence. I seem
fated to trample on every duty,--a bad son and a bad father!"

Murphy felt that grief such as Rodolph's admitted of no ordinary
consolation. He did not therefore attempt to interrupt its violence by
any hackneyed phrases or promises of comfort he well knew could never be
realised.

After a long silence, Rodolph resumed, in an agitated voice:

"I cannot stay here after what has happened. Paris is hateful to me; I
will quit it to-morrow."

"You are quite right in so doing, my lord."

"We will go by a circuitous route, and I will stop at Bouqueval as I
pass, that I may spend some few hours alone with my sad thoughts, in the
chamber where my poor child enjoyed the only peaceful days she was ever
permitted to taste. All that was hers shall be carefully collected
together,--the books from which she studied, her writings, clothes, even
the very articles of furniture and hangings of the chamber; I will make
a careful sketch of the whole, and when I return to Gerolstein I will
construct a small building containing the fac-simile of my poor child's
apartment, with all that it contained, to be erected in the private
ground in which stands the monument built by me in memory of my outraged
parent; there I will go and bewail my daughter. These two funeral
mementos will for ever remind me of my crime towards my father, and the
punishment inflicted on me through my own child."

After a fresh silence, Rodolph said, "Let all be got ready for my
departure to-morrow."

Anxious, if possible, to create if but a momentary change of ideas in
the prince's mind, Murphy said, "All shall be prepared, my lord,
according to your desire; only you appear to have forgotten that
to-morrow is fixed for the celebration of the marriage of Rigolette with
the son of Madame Georges, and that the ceremony was to take place at
Bouqueval. Not contented with providing for Germain as long as he lives,
and liberally endowing his bride, you also promised to be present to
bestow the hand of your young protégée on her lover."

"True, true,--I did engage to do so; but I confess I have not sufficient
courage to venture in a scene of gaiety. I cannot, therefore, visit the
farm to-morrow, for to join in the wedding festivities is impossible."

"Perhaps the scene might serve to calm your wounded feelings, with the
thought that, if miserable yourself, you have made others happy."

"No, my friend, no! Grief is ever selfish, and loves to indulge itself
in solitude. You shall supply my place to-morrow; and beg of Madame
Georges to collect together all my poor child's possessions; then when
the room is fitly arranged, you will have an exact copy taken of it, and
cause it to be sent to me in Germany."

"And will you not even see Madame d'Harville, my lord, ere you set out
on your journey?"

At the recollection of Clémence, Rodolph started; his affection for her
burned as steadfastly and sincerely as ever, but, for the moment, it
seemed buried beneath the overwhelming grief which oppressed him. The
tender sympathy of Madame d'Harville appeared to him the only source of
consolation; but, the next instant, he rejected the idea of seeking
consolation in the love of another as unworthy his paternal sorrow.

"No, my kind friend, I shall not see Madame d'Harville previously to
quitting Paris. I wrote to her a few days since, telling her of the
death of Fleur-de-Marie, and the pain it had caused me. When she learns
that the ill-fated girl was my long-lost daughter, she will readily
understand that there are some griefs, or rather fatal punishments, it
is requisite to endure alone."

A gentle knock was heard at the door at this minute. Rodolph, with
displeasure at the interruption, signed for Murphy to ascertain who it
was. The faithful squire immediately rose, and, partly opening the door,
perceived one of the prince's aides-de-camp, who said a few words in a
low tone, to which Murphy replied by a motion of the head, and,
returning to Rodolph, said, "Have the goodness, my lord, to excuse me
for an instant! A person wishes to see me directly on business that
concerns your royal highness."

"Go!" replied the prince.

Scarcely had the door closed on Murphy, than Rodolph, covering his face
with his hands, uttered a heavy groan.

"What horrible feelings possess me!" cried he. "My mind seems one vast
ocean of gall and bitterness; the presence of my best and most faithful
friend is painful to me; and the recollection of a love pure and
elevated as mine distresses and embarrasses me. Last night, too, I was
cowardly enough to learn the death of Sarah with savage joy. I
felicitated myself on being free from an unnatural being like her, who
had caused the destruction of my child; I promised myself the horrible
satisfaction of witnessing the mortal agonies of the wretch who deprived
my child of life. But I was baffled of my dear revenge. Another cruel
punishment!" exclaimed he, starting with rage from his chair. "Yet
although I knew yesterday as well as to-day that my child was dead, I
did not experience such a whirlwind of despairing, self-accusing agony
as now rends my soul; because I did not then recall to mind the one
torturing fact that will for ever step in between me and consolation. I
did not then recall the circumstance of my having seen and known my
beloved child, and, moreover, discovered in her untold treasures of
goodness and nobleness of character. Yet how little did I profit by her
being at the farm! Merely saw her three times--yes, three times--no
more! when I might have beheld her each day--nay, have kept her ever
beside me. Oh, that will be my unceasing punishment, my never-ending
reproach and torture,--to think I had my daughter near me, and actually
sent her from me! Nor, though I felt how deserving she was of every fond
care, did I even admit her into my presence but three poor distant
times."

While the unhappy prince thus continued to torment himself with these
and similar reflections, the door of the apartment suddenly opened and
Murphy entered, looking so pale and agitated that even Rodolph could not
help remarking it; and rising hastily, he exclaimed:

"For heaven's sake, Murphy, what has happened to you?"

"Nothing, my lord."

"Yet you are pale!"

"'Tis with astonishment."

"Astonishment at what?"

"Madame d'Harville."

"Madame d'Harville! Gracious heaven! Some fresh misfortune?"

"No, no, my lord--indeed, nothing unfortunate has occurred. Pray compose
yourself! She is--in the drawing-room--"

"Here--in my house? Madame d'Harville here? Impossible!"

"My lord, I told you the surprise had quite overpowered me!"

"Tell me what has induced her to take such a step! Speak, I conjure you!
In heaven's name, explain the reason for her acting so contrary to her
usually rigid notions!"

"Indeed, my lord, I know nothing. But I cannot even account to myself
for the strange feelings that come over me."

"You are concealing something from me!"

"No, indeed, my lord; on the honour of a man, I know only what the
marquise said to me."

"And what did she say?"

"'Sir Walter,' said she, with an unsteady voice, though her countenance
shone with joy, 'no doubt you are surprised at my presence here; but
there are some circumstances so imperative as to leave no time to
consider the strict rules of etiquette. Beg of his royal highness to
grant me an immediate interview of a few minutes only in your presence,
for I know well that the prince has not a better friend than yourself. I
might certainly have requested him to call on me, but that would have
caused at least an hour's delay; and when the prince has learned the
occasion of my coming, I am sure he will feel grateful to me for not
delaying the interview I seek for a single instant.' And as she uttered
these words, her countenance wore an expression that made me tremble all
over."

"But," returned Rodolph, in an agitated tone, and, spite of all his
attempts at retaining his composure, being even paler than Murphy
himself, "I cannot guess what caused your emotion; there must be
something beyond those words of Madame d'Harville's to occasion it."

"I pledge you my honour if there be I am wholly ignorant of it; but I
confess those few words from Madame la Marquise seemed quite to bewilder
me. But even you, my lord, are paler than you were."

"Am I?" said Rodolph, supporting himself on the back of his chair, for
he felt his knees tremble under him.

"Nay, but, my lord, you are quite as much overcome as I was. What ails
you?"

"Though I die in making the effort," exclaimed the prince, "it shall be
done. Beg of Madame d'Harville to do me the honour to walk in."

By a singular and sympathetic feeling this extraordinary and wholly
unexpected visit of Madame d'Harville had awakened in the breasts of
Murphy and Rodolph the same vague and groundless hope, but so senseless
did it seem that neither was willing to confess it to the other.

       *       *       *       *       *

Madame d'Harville, conducted by Murphy, entered the apartment in which
was the prince.




CHAPTER VI.

THE FATHER AND DAUGHTER.


Ignorant of Fleur-de-Marie's being the prince's daughter, Madame
d'Harville, in the fullness of her delight at restoring to him his
protégée, had not reckoned upon its being necessary to observe any
particular precaution in presenting her young companion, whom she merely
left in the carriage until she had ascertained whether Rodolph chose to
make known his real name and rank to the object of his bounty, and to
receive her at his own house; but perceiving the deep alteration in his
features, and struck with the visible gloom which overspread them, as
well as the marks of recent tears so evident in his sunken eye, Clémence
became alarmed with the idea that some fresh misfortune, greater than
the loss of La Goualeuse would be considered, had suddenly occurred.
Wholly losing sight, therefore, of the original cause of her visit, she
anxiously exclaimed:

"For heaven's sake, my lord, what has happened?"

"Do you not know, madame? Then all hope is at an end! Alas! your earnest
manner, the interview so unexpectedly sought by you, all made me
believe--"

"Let me entreat of you not to think for a moment of the cause of my
visit; but, in the name of that parent whose life you have preserved, I
adjure you to explain to me the cause of the deep affliction in which I
find you plunged. Your paleness, your dejection, terrify me. Oh, be
generous, my lord, and relieve the cruel anxiety I suffer."

"Wherefore should I burden your kind heart with the relation of woes
that admit of no relief?"

"Your words, your hesitation, but increase my apprehensions. Oh, my
lord, I beseech you tell me all! Sir Walter, will you not take pity on
my fears? For the love of heaven explain the meaning of all this! What
has befallen the prince?"

"Nay," interrupted Rodolph, in a voice that vainly struggled for
firmness, "since you desire it, madame, learn that since I acquainted
you with the death of Fleur-de-Marie I have learned she was my own
daughter."

"Your daughter!" exclaimed Clémence, in a tone impossible to describe.
"Fleur-de-Marie your daughter!"

"And when just now you desired to see me, to communicate tidings that
would fill me with joy,--pardon and pity the weakness of a parent half
distracted at the loss of his newly-found treasure!--I ventured to
hope--But no,--no,--I see too plainly I was mistaken! Forgive me, my
brain seems wandering, and I scarce know what I say or do."

And then sinking under the failure of this last fond imagination of his
heart, and unable longer to struggle with his black despair, Rodolph
threw himself back in his chair and covered his face with his hands,
while Madame d'Harville, astonished at what she had just heard, remained
motionless and silent, scarcely able to breathe amid the conflicting
emotions which took possession of her mind; at one instant glowing with
delight at the thoughts of the joy she had it in her power to impart,
then trembling for the consequences her explanation might produce on the
overexcited mind of the prince.

Both these reflections were, however, swallowed up in the enthusiastic
gratitude which she felt in the consideration that to her had been
deputed the happiness not only of announcing to the grief-stricken
father that his child still lived, but that the unspeakable rapture of
placing that daughter in her parent's arms was likewise vouchsafed to
her.

Carried away by a burst of pious thankfulness, and wholly forgetting the
presence of Rodolph and Murphy, Madame d'Harville threw herself on her
knees, and, clasping her hands, exclaimed, in a tone of fervent piety
and ineffable gratitude:

"Thanks, thanks, my God, for this exceeding goodness! Ever blessed be
thy gracious name for having permitted me to be the happy bearer of such
joyful tidings,--to wipe away a father's tears by telling him his child
lives to reward his tenderness!"

Although these words, pronounced with the sincerest fervour and holy
ecstasy, were uttered almost in a whisper, yet they reached the
listening ears of Rodolph and his faithful squire; and as Clémence rose
from her knees, the prince gazed on her lovely countenance, irradiated
as it was with celestial happiness and beaming with more than earthly
beauty, with an expression almost amounting to adoration.

Supporting herself with one hand, while with the other she sought to
still the rapid beating of her heart, Madame d'Harville replied by a
sweet smile and an affirmative inclination of the head to the eager,
soul-searching look of Rodolph, a look wholly beyond our poor powers to
describe.

"And where is she?" exclaimed the prince, trembling like a leaf.

"In my carriage."

But for the intervention of Murphy, who threw himself before Rodolph
with the quickness of lightning, the latter would have rushed to the
vehicle.

"Would you kill her, my lord?" exclaimed the squire, forcibly retaining
the prince.

"She was merely pronounced convalescent yesterday," added Clémence;
"therefore, as you value her safety, do not venture to try the poor
girl's strength too far."

"You are right," said Rodolph, scarcely able to restrain himself
sufficiently to follow this prudent advice, "you are quite right. Yes, I
will be calm,--I will not see her at present; I will wait until her
first emotions have subsided. Oh, 'tis too much to endure in so short a
space of time!" Then addressing Madame d'Harville, he said, in an
agitated tone, while he extended to her his hand, "I feel that I am
pardoned, and that you are the angel of forgiveness who brings me the
glad tidings of my remission."

"Nay, my lord, we do but mutually requite our several obligations. You
preserved to me my father, and Heaven permits me to restore your
daughter at a time you bewailed her as lost. But I, too, must beg to be
excused for the weakness which resists all my endeavours to control it;
the sudden and unexpected news you have communicated to me has quite
overcome me, and I confess I should not have sufficient command over
myself to go in quest of Fleur-de-Marie,--my emotion would terrify her."

"And by what means was she preserved?" exclaimed Rodolph; "and whose
hand snatched her from death? I am most ungrateful not to have put these
questions to you earlier."

"She was rescued from drowning by a courageous female, who snatched her
from a watery grave just as she was sinking."

"Do you know who this female was?"

"I do; and to-morrow she will be at my house."

"The debt is immense!" rejoined the prince; "but I will endeavour to
repay it."

"Heaven must have inspired me with the idea of leaving Fleur-de-Marie in
the carriage," said the marquise. "Had I brought her in with me the
shock must have killed her."

"Now, then," said the prince, who had been for some minutes occupied in
endeavouring to subdue his extreme agitation, "I can promise you, my
kind friends, that I have my feelings sufficiently under control to
venture to meet my--my--daughter. Go, Murphy, and fetch her to my
longing arms."

Rodolph pronounced the word daughter with a tenderness of voice and
manner impossible to describe.

"Are you quite sure you are equal to the trying scene, my lord?"
inquired Clémence; "for we must run no risks with one in
Fleur-de-Marie's delicate state."

"Oh, yes,--yes! Be under no alarm! I am too well aware of the dangerous
consequences any undue emotion would occasion my child; be assured I
will not expose her to anything of the sort. But go--go--my good Murphy;
I beseech you hasten to bring her hither."

"Don't be alarmed, madame," said the squire, who had attentively
scrutinised the countenance of the prince; "she may come now without
danger. I am quite sure that his royal highness will sufficiently
command himself."

"Then go--go--my faithful friend; you are keeping me in torments."

"Just give me one minute, my lord," said the excellent creature, drying
the moisture from his eyes; "I must not let the poor thing see I have
been crying. There, there--that will do! I should not like to cross the
antechamber looking like a weeping Magdalen." So saying, the squire
proceeded towards the door, but suddenly turning back, he said, "But, my
lord, what am I to say to her?"

"Yes, what had he better say?" inquired the prince of Clémence.

"That M. Rodolph wishes to see her,--nothing more."

"Oh, to be sure! How stupid of me not to think of that! M. Rodolph
wishes to see her,--capital, excellent!" repeated the squire, who
evidently partook of Madame d'Harville's nervousness, and sought to
defer the moment of his embassy by one little pretext and the other.
"That will not give her the least suspicion, not the shadow of a notion
what she is wanted for. Nothing better could have been suggested."

But still Murphy stirred not.

"Sir Walter," said Clémence, smiling, "you are afraid!"

"Well, I won't deny it!" said the squire. "And, spite of my standing six
feet high, I feel and know I am trembling like a child."

"Then take care, my good fellow!" said Rodolph. "You had better wait a
little longer if you do not feel quite sure of yourself."

"No, no, my lord; I have got the upper hand of my fears this time!"
replied Murphy, pressing his two herculean fists to his eyes. "I know
very well that at my time of life it is ridiculous for me to show such
weakness! I'm going, my lord, don't you be uneasy!" So saying, Murphy
left the room with a firm step and composed countenance.

A momentary silence followed his departure, and then, for the first
time, Clémence remembered she was alone with the prince, and under his
roof. Rodolph drew near to her, and said, with an almost timid voice and
manner:

"If I select this day--this hour--to divulge to you the dearest secret
of my heart, it is that the solemnity of the present moment may give
greater weight to that I would impart, and persuade you to believe me
sincere, when I assure you I have loved you almost from the hour I first
beheld you. While obstacles stood in the way of my love I studiously
concealed it; but you are now free to hear me declare my affection, and
to ask you to become a mother to the daughter you restore to me."

"My lord," cried Madame d'Harville, "what words are these?"

"Oh, refuse me not," said Rodolph, tenderly; "let this day decide the
happiness of my future life."

Clémence had also nourished a deep and sincere passion for the prince;
and his open, manly avowal of a similar feeling towards herself, made
under such peculiar circumstances, transported her with joy, and she
could but falter out in a hesitating voice:

"My lord, 'tis for me to remind you of the difference of our stations,
and the interests of your sovereignty."

"Permit me first to consider the interest of my own heart, and that of
my beloved child. Oh, make us both happy by consenting to be mine! So
that I who, but a short time since, owned no blessed tie, may now
proudly indulge in the idea of having both a wife and daughter; and give
to the sorrowing child who is just restored to my arms the delight of
saying, 'My father--my mother--my sister!'--for your sweet girl would
become mine also."

"Ah, my lord," exclaimed Clémence, "my grateful tears alone can speak my
sense of such noble conduct!" Then suddenly checking herself, she added,
"I hear persons approaching, my lord; your daughter comes."

"Refuse me not, I conjure you!" responded Rodolph, in an agitated and
suppliant tone. "By the love I bear you, I beseech you to make me happy
by saying, 'Our daughter comes!'"

"Then be it _our_ daughter, if such is your sincere wish," murmured
Clémence, as Murphy, throwing open the door, introduced Fleur-de-Marie
into the salon.

The astonished girl had, upon entering the immense hôtel from the
spacious portico under which she alighted from the marquise's carriage,
first crossed an anteroom filled with servants dressed in rich liveries;
then a waiting-room, in which were other domestics belonging to the
establishment, also wearing the magnificent livery of the house of
Gerolstein; and lastly, the apartment in which the chamberlain and
aides-de-camp of the prince attended his orders.

The surprise and wonder of the poor Goualeuse, whose ideas of splendour
were based on the recollection of the farm at Bouqueval, as she
traversed those princely chambers glittering with gold, silver,
paintings, and mirrors, may easily be imagined.

Directly she appeared, Madame d'Harville ran towards her, kindly took
her hand, and throwing her arm around her waist, as though to support
her, led her towards Rodolph, who remained supporting himself by leaning
one arm on the chimneypiece, wholly incapable of advancing a single
step.

Having consigned Fleur-de-Marie to the care of Madame d'Harville, Murphy
hastily retreated behind one of the large window curtains, not feeling
too sure of his own self-command.

At the sight of him who was, in the eyes of Fleur-de-Marie, not only her
benefactor but the worshipped idol of her heart, the poor girl, whose
delicate frame had been so severely tried by illness, became seized with
a universal trembling.

"Compose yourself, my child!" said Madame d'Harville. "See, there is
your kind M. Rodolph, who has been extremely uneasy on your account, and
is most anxious to see you."

"Oh, yes--uneasy, indeed!" stammered forth Rodolph, whose breast was
wrung with anguish at the sight of his child's pale, suffering looks,
and, spite of his previous resolution, the prince found himself
compelled to turn away his head to conceal his deep emotion.

"My poor child!" said Madame d'Harville, striving to divert the
attention of Fleur-de-Marie, "you are still very weak!" and, leading her
to a large gilded armchair, she made her sit down, while the astonished
Goualeuse seemed almost to shrink from touching the elegant cushions
with which it was lined. But she did not recover herself; on the
contrary, she seemed oppressed. She strove to speak, but her voice
failed her, and her heart reproached her with not having said one word
to her venerated benefactor of the deep gratitude which filled her whole
soul.

At length, at a sign from Madame d'Harville, who, leaning over
Fleur-de-Marie, held one of the poor girl's thin, wasted hands in hers,
the prince gently approached the side of the chair, and now, more
collected, he said to Fleur-de-Marie, as she turned her sweet face to
welcome him:

"At last, my child, your friends have recovered you, and be sure it is
not their intention ever to part with you again. One thing you must
endeavour to do, and that is to banish for ever from your mind all your
past sufferings."

"Yes, my dear girl," said Clémence, "you can in no way so effectually
prove your affection for your friends as by forgetting the past."

"Ah, M. Rodolph, and you, too, madame, pray believe that if, spite of
myself, my thoughts do revert to the past, it will be but to remind me
that but for you that wretched past would still be my lot."

"But we shall take pains to prevent such mournful reminiscences ever
crossing your mind. Our tenderness will not allow you time to look back,
my dear Marie," said Rodolph; "you know I gave you that name at the
farm."

"Oh, yes, M. Rodolph, I well remember you did. And Madame Georges, who
was so good as even to permit me to call her mother, is she quite well?"

"Perfectly so, my child; but I have some most important news for you.
Since I last saw you some great discoveries have been made respecting
your birth. We have found out who were your parents, and your father is
known to us."

The voice of Rodolph trembled so much while pronouncing these words
that Fleur-de-Marie, herself deeply affected, turned quickly towards
him, but, fortunately, he managed to conceal his countenance from her.

A somewhat ridiculous occurrence also served at this instant to call off
the attention of the Goualeuse from too closely observing the prince's
emotion,--the worthy squire, who still remained behind the curtain,
feigning to be very busily occupied in gazing upon the garden belonging
to the hôtel, suddenly blew his nose with a twanging sound that reëchoed
through the salon; for, in truth, the worthy man was crying like a
child.

"Yes, my dear Marie," said Clémence, hastily, "your father is known to
us--he is still living."

"My father!" cried La Goualeuse, in a tone of tender delight, that
subjected the firmness of Rodolph to another difficult test.

"And some day," continued Clémence,--"perhaps very shortly, you will see
him. But what will, no doubt, greatly astonish you, is that he is of
high rank and noble birth."

"And my mother, shall I not see her, too, madame?"

"That is a question your father will answer, my dear child. But tell me,
shall you not be delighted to see him?"

"Oh, yes, madame," answered Fleur-de-Marie, casting down her eyes.

"How much you will love him when you know him!" said Clémence.

"A new existence will commence for you from that very day, will it not,
Marie?" asked the prince.

"Oh, no, M. Rodolph," replied Fleur-de-Marie, artlessly; "my new
existence began when you took pity on me, and sent me to the farm."

"But your father loves you fondly--dearly!" said the prince.

"I know nothing of my father, M. Rodolph; but to you I owe everything in
this world and the next."

"Then you love me better, perhaps, than you would your father?"

"Oh, M. Rodolph, I revere and bless you with all my heart! For you have
been a saviour and preserver to me both of body and soul," replied La
Goualeuse, with a degree of fervour and enthusiasm that overcame her
natural diffidence.

"When this kind lady was so good as to visit me in prison, I said to
her, as I did to every one else, 'Oh, if you have any trouble, only let
M. Rodolph know it, and he will be sure to relieve you.' And when I saw
any person hesitating between good and evil, I used to advise them to
try and be virtuous, telling them M. Rodolph always found a way to
punish the wicked. And to such as were far gone in sin, I said, 'Take
care, M. Rodolph will recompense you as you deserve.' And even when I
thought myself dying, I felt comfort in persuading myself that God would
pity and pardon me, since M. Rodolph had deigned to do so."

Carried away by her intense feelings of gratitude and reverence for her
benefactor, Fleur-de-Marie broke through her habitual timidity; while
thus expressing herself a bright flush coloured her pale cheeks, while
her soft blue eyes, raised towards heaven as though in earnest prayer,
shone with unusual brilliancy.

A silence of some seconds succeeded to this burst of enthusiasm, while
the spectators of the scene were too deeply affected to attempt a reply.

"It seems, then, my dear child," said Rodolph, at length, "that I have
almost usurped your parent's place in your affections?"

"Indeed, M. Rodolph, I cannot help it! Perhaps it is very wrong in me to
prefer you as I do, but I know you, and my father is a stranger to me."
Then letting her head fall on her bosom, she added, in a low, confused
manner, "And besides, M. Rodolph, though you are acquainted with the
past, you have loaded me with kindness; while my father is ignorant
of--of--my shame,--and may, probably, regret, when he does know, having
found an unfortunate creature like myself. And then, too," continued the
poor girl, with a shudder, "madame tells me he is of high birth; how,
then, can he look upon me without shame and aversion?"

"Shame!" exclaimed Rodolph, drawing himself up with proud dignity; "no,
no, my poor child, your grateful, happy father will raise you to a
position so great, so brilliant, that the richest and highest in the
land shall behold you with respect. Despise and blush for you!--never!
You shall take your place among the first princesses of Europe, and
prove yourself worthy of the blood of queens which flows in your veins."

"My lord! My lord!" cried Clémence and Murphy at the same time, equally
alarmed at the excited manner of Rodolph, and the increasing paleness of
Fleur-de-Marie, who gazed on her father in silent amazement.

"Ashamed of you!" continued he. "Oh, if ever I rejoiced in my princely
rank it is now that it affords me the means of raising you from the
depths to which the wickedness of others consigned you. Yes, my child!
My long-lost, idolised child! In me behold your father!" And utterly
unable longer to repress his feelings, the prince threw himself at the
feet of Fleur-de-Marie, and covered her hand with tears and caresses.

"Thanks, my God," exclaimed Fleur-de-Marie, passionately clasping her
hands, "for permitting me to indulge that love for my benefactor with
which my heart was filled. My father! Oh, blessed title, that enables me
to love him even as I--" And unable to bear up against the suddenness of
the disclosure, Fleur-de-Marie fell fainting in the prince's arms.

Murphy rushed to the waiting-room, and shouted vehemently:

"Send for Doctor David directly! Directly, do you hear? For his royal
highness,--no--no, for some one who is suddenly taken ill here."

"Wretch that I am!" exclaimed Rodolph, sobbing almost hysterically at
his daughter's feet, "I have killed her! Marie, my child, look up! It is
your father calls you! Forgive--oh, forgive my precipitancy--my want of
caution in disclosing to you this happy news! She is dead! God of
heaven! Have I then but found her to see her torn from me for ever?"

"Calm yourself, my lord," said Clémence, "there is no danger, depend
upon it. The colour returns to her cheeks; the surprise overcame her."

"But so recently risen from a bed of sickness that surprise may kill
her! Unhappy man that I am, doomed for ever to misery and suffering!"

At this moment the negro doctor, David, entered the room in great haste,
holding in one hand a small case filled with phials, and in the other a
paper he handed to Murphy.

"David!" exclaimed Rodolph, "my child is dying! I once saved your life,
repay me now by saving that of my daughter."

Although amazed at hearing the prince speak thus, David hurried to
Fleur-de-Marie, whom Madame d'Harville was supporting in her arms,
examined her pulse and the veins of her temples, then turning towards
Rodolph, who in speechless agony was awaiting his decree, he said:

"Your royal highness has no cause for alarm; there is no danger."

"Can it be true? Are you quite sure she will recover?"

"Perfectly so, my lord; a few drops of ether administered in a glass of
water is all that is requisite to restore consciousness."

"Thanks, thanks, my good, my excellent David!" cried the prince, in an
ecstasy of joy. Then addressing Clémence, Rodolph added, "Our daughter
will be spared to us."

Murphy had just glanced over the paper given him by David; suddenly he
started, and gazed with looks of terror at the prince.

"Yes, my old and faithful friend," cried Rodolph, misinterpreting the
expression of Murphy's features, "ere long my daughter will enjoy the
happiness of calling the Marquise d'Harville mother."

"Yesterday's news," said Murphy, trembling violently, "was false."

"What say you?"

"The report of the death of the Countess Macgregor, my lord, is
unfounded; her ladyship had undergone a severe crisis of her illness,
and had fallen into a state of insensibility, which was mistaken by
those around her for death itself, and from hence originated the account
of her having expired; but to-day hopes are entertained of her ultimate
recovery."

"Merciful heavens! Can this be possible?" exclaimed the prince, filled
with sudden alarm; while Clémence, who understood nothing of all this,
looked on with undisguised astonishment.

"My lord," said David, still occupied with Fleur-de-Marie, "there is no
need of the slightest apprehension respecting this young lady, but it is
absolutely necessary she should be in the open air; this chair might be
easily rolled out on the terrace, by opening the door leading to the
garden; she would then immediately recover consciousness."

Murphy instantly ran to open the glass door, which led to a broad
terrace, then, aided by David, he gently rolled the armchair on to it.

"Alas!" cried Rodolph, as soon as Murphy and David were at a distance,
"you have yet to learn that the Countess Sarah is the mother of
Fleur-de-Marie; and I believed her dead."

A few moments of profound silence followed; Madame d'Harville became
deadly pale, while an icy coldness seemed to chill her heart.

"Let me briefly explain," continued Rodolph, in extreme agitation,
mingled with bitter sarcasm, "that this ambitious and selfish woman,
caring for nothing but my rank and title, contrived, during my extreme
youth, to draw me into a secret marriage, which was afterwards annulled.
Being desirous of contracting a second marriage, the countess occasioned
all the misfortunes of her unhappy child, by abandoning her to the care
of mercenary and unprincipled people."

"Now I can account for the repugnance you manifested towards her."

"And you may likewise understand why she so bitterly pursued you, and
had twice so nearly effected your destruction by her infamous slanders.
Still a prey to her insatiate ambition, she hoped, by separating me from
any other attachment, to draw me a second time within her snares. And
this heartless woman still exists."

"Nay, nay, my lord, that tone of bitter regret is not worthy of you, any
more than the feeling which dictated it."

"You do not know the wretchedness she has already caused me; and even
now that I had dared to dream of happiness, and looked forward to
obtaining in you the comfort and solace of my life, as well as a mother
for my newly recovered child, this woman again crosses my path, and,
like the spirit of evil, dashes the cup from my lips ere it is tasted."

"Come, come, my lord," said poor Clémence, striving to look cheerful,
though her tears flowed fast, spite of all her efforts to restrain them,
"take courage, you have a great and holy duty to perform. But just now,
when impelled by a natural burst of paternal affection, you said that
the future destiny of your daughter should be happy and prosperous as
her past life had been the reverse, that you would elevate her in the
eyes of the world even more than she had been sunken and depressed. To
do this you must legitimise her birth, and the only means by which that
can be achieved is by espousing the Countess Macgregor."

"Never, never! That would be to reward the perjury, selfishness, and
unbridled ambition of the unnatural mother of my poor child. But Marie
shall not suffer by my resolution. I will publicly acknowledge her, you
will kindly take her under your protection, and, I venture to hope,
afford her a truly maternal shelter."

"No, my lord, you will not act thus! You will not permit the cloud of
doubt or mystery to hang over the birth of your daughter. The Countess
Sarah is descended from an ancient and noble family; such an alliance
is, certainly, disproportionate for you, but still is an honourable one;
it will effectually legitimise your daughter, and whatever may be her
future destiny, she will have cause to boast of her father, and openly
declare who was her mother."

"But think not I can or will resign you! It were easier to lay down my
life than surrender the blessed hope of dividing my time and affection
between two beings I so dearly love as yourself and my daughter."

"Your child will still remain to you, my lord. Providence has
miraculously restored her to you; it would be sore ingratitude on your
part to deem your happiness incomplete."

"You could not argue thus if you loved as I love."

"I will not undeceive you, great as is your error; on the contrary, I
would have you persist in that belief, it will make the task I recommend
less painful to you."

"But if you really loved me,--if you suffered as bitterly and severely
as I do at the thoughts of my marrying another, you would be wretched as
I am. What will console you for our separation?"

"My lord, I shall try to find solace in the discharge of my charitable
duties,--duties I first learned to love and practise from your counsels
and suggestions, and which have already afforded me so much consolation
and sweet occupation."

"Hear me, I beseech you,--since you tell me it is right, I will marry
this woman; but the sacrifice once accomplished, think not I will remain
a single hour with her, or suffer her to behold my child; thus
Fleur-de-Marie will lose in you the best and tenderest of mothers."

"But she will still retain the best and tenderest of fathers. By your
marriage with the Countess Sarah she will be the legitimate daughter of
one of Europe's sovereign princes, and, as you but just now observed, my
lord, her position will be as great and splendid as it has been
miserable and obscure."

"You are then pitilessly determined to shut out all hope from me?
Unhappy being that I am!"

"Dare you style yourself unhappy,--you so good, so just, so elevated in
rank, as well as in mind and feeling? Who so well and nobly understand
the duty of self-denial and self-sacrifice? When but a short time since
you bewailed your child's death with such heartfelt agony, had any one
said to you, 'Utter the dearest wish of your soul and it shall be
accomplished,' you would have cried, 'My child--my daughter! Restore her
to me in life and health!' This unexpected blessing is granted you, your
daughter is given to your longing arms, and yet you style yourself
miserable! Ah, my lord, let not Fleur-de-Marie hear you, I beseech you!"

"You are right," said Rodolph, after a long silence, "such happiness as
I aspired to would have been too much for this world, and far beyond my
right even to dream of. Be satisfied your words have prevailed,--I will
act according to my duty to my daughter, and forget the bleeding wound
it inflicts on my own heart. But I am not sorry I hesitated in my
resolution, since I owe to it a fresh proof of the perfection of your
character."

"And is it not to you I owe the power of struggling with personal
feelings and devoting myself to the good of others? Was it not you who
raised and comforted my poor depressed mind, and encouraged me to look
for comfort where only it could be found? To you, then, be all the merit
of the little virtue I may now be practising, as well as all the good I
may hereafter achieve. But take courage, my lord, bear up, as becomes
one of your firm, right-minded nature. Directly Fleur-de-Marie is equal
to the journey, remove her to Germany; once there, she will benefit so
greatly by the grave tranquillity of the country that her mind and
feelings will be soothed and calmed down to a placidity and gentle
enjoyment of the present, while the past will seem but as a troubled
dream."

"But you--you?"

"Ah, I may now confess with joy and pride that my love for you will be,
as it were, a shield of defence from all snares and temptations,--a
guardian angel that will preserve me from all that could assail me in
body or mind. Then I shall write to you daily. Pardon me this weakness,
'tis the only one I shall allow myself; you, my lord, will also write to
me occasionally, if but to give me intelligence of her whom once, at
least, I called my daughter," said Clémence, melting into tears at the
thoughts of all she was giving up, "and who will ever be fondly
cherished in my heart as such; and when advancing years shall permit me
fearlessly and openly to avow the regard which binds us to each other,
then, my lord, I vow by your daughter that, if you desire it, I will
establish myself in Germany, in the same city you yourself inhabit,
never again to quit you, but so to end a life which might have been
passed more agreeably, as far as our earthly feelings were concerned,
but which shall, at least, have been spent in the practice of every
noble and virtuous feeling."

"My lord," exclaimed Murphy, entering with eagerness, "she whom Heaven
has restored to you has regained her senses. Her first word upon
recovering consciousness was to call for you. 'My father!--my beloved
father!' she cried, 'oh, do not take me from him!' Come to her, my lord,
she is all impatience again to behold you!"

       *       *       *       *       *

A few minutes after this Madame d'Harville quitted the prince's hôtel,
while the latter repaired in all haste to the house of the Countess
Macgregor, accompanied by Murphy, Baron de Graün, and an aide-de-camp.




CHAPTER VII.

THE MARRIAGE.


From the moment in which she had learnt from Rodolph the violent death
of Fleur-de-Marie, Sarah had felt crushed and borne down by a disclosure
so fatal to all her ambitious hopes. Tortured equally by a too late
repentance, she had fallen into a fearful nervous attack, attended even
by delirium; her partially healed wound opened afresh, and a long
continuation of fainting fits gave rise to the supposition of her death.
Yet still the natural strength of her constitution sustained her even
amid this severe shock, and life seemed to struggle vigorously against
death.

Seated in an easy chair, the better to relieve herself from the sense of
suffocation which oppressed her, Sarah had remained for some time
plunged in bitter reflections, almost amounting to regrets, that she had
been permitted to escape from almost certain death.

Suddenly the door of the invalid's chamber opened, and Thomas Seyton
entered, evidently struggling to restrain some powerful emotion. Hastily
waving his hand for the countess's attendants to retire, he approached
his sister, who seemed scarcely to perceive her brother's presence.

"How are you now?" inquired he.

"Much the same; I feel very weak, and have at times a most painful
sensation of being suffocated. Why was I not permitted to quit this
world during my late attack?"

"Sarah," replied Thomas Seyton, after a momentary silence, "you are
hovering between life and death,--any violent emotion might destroy you
or recall your feeble powers and restore you to health."

"There can be no further trial for me, brother!"

"You know not that--"

"I could now even hear that Rodolph were dead without a shock. The pale
spectre of my murdered child--murdered through my instrumentality, is
ever before me. It creates not mere emotion, but a bitter and ceaseless
remorse. Oh, brother, I have known the feelings of a mother only since I
have become childless."

"I own I liked better to find in you that cold, calculating ambition,
that made you regard your daughter but as a means of realising the dream
of your whole existence."

"That ambition fell to the ground, crushed for ever beneath the
overwhelming force of the prince's reproaches. And the picture drawn by
him of the horrors to which my child had been exposed awakened in my
breast all a mother's tenderness."

"And how," said Seyton, hesitatingly and laying deep emphasis on each
word he uttered, "if by a miracle, a chance, an almost impossibility,
your daughter were still living, tell me how you would support such a
discovery."

"I should expire of shame and despair!"

"No such thing! You would be but too delighted at the triumph such a
circumstance would afford to your ambition; for had your daughter
survived, the prince would, beyond a doubt, have married you."

"And admitting the miracle you speak of could happen, I should have no
right to live; but so soon as the prince had bestowed on me the title of
his consort, my duty would have been to deliver him from an unworthy
spouse, and my daughter from an unnatural mother."

The perplexity of Thomas Seyton momentarily increased. Commissioned by
Rodolph, who was waiting in an adjoining room, to acquaint Sarah that
Fleur-de-Marie still lived, he knew not how to proceed. So feeble was
the state of the countess's health, that an instant might extinguish the
faint spark that still animated her frame; and he saw that any delay in
performing the nuptial rite between herself and the prince might be
fatal to every hope. Determined to legitimise the birth of
Fleur-de-Marie by giving every necessary formality to the ceremony, the
prince had brought with him a clergyman to perform the sacred service,
and two witnesses in the persons of Murphy and Baron de Graün. The Duc
de Lucenay and Lord Douglas, hastily summoned by Seyton, had arrived to
act as attesting witnesses on the part of the countess.

Each moment became important, but the remorse of Sarah, mingled as it
was with a maternal tenderness that had entirely replaced the fiery
ambition that once held sway in her breast, rendered the task of Seyton
still more difficult. He could but hope that his sister deceived either
herself or him, and that her pride and vanity would rekindle in all
their former brightness at the prospect of the crown so long and
ardently coveted.

"Sister," resumed Seyton, in a grave and solemn voice, "I am placed in a
situation of cruel perplexity. I could utter one word of such deep
importance that it might save your life or stretch you a corpse at my
feet."

"I have already told you nothing in this world can move me more."

"Yes, one--one event, my sister."

"And what is that?"

"Your daughter's welfare."

"I have no longer a child,--she is dead!"

"But if she were not?"

"Cease, brother, such useless suppositions,--we exhausted that subject
some minutes since. Leave me to unavailing regrets!"

"Nay, but I cannot so easily persuade myself that if, by some almost
incredible chance, some unhoped-for aid, your daughter had been snatched
from death, and still lived--"

"I beseech you talk not thus to me,--you know not what I suffer."

"Then listen to me, sister, while I declare that, as the Almighty shall
judge you and pardon me, your daughter lives!"

"Lives! said you? My child lives?"

"I did, and truly so; the prince, with a clergyman and the necessary
witnesses, awaits in the adjoining chamber; I have summoned two of our
friends to act as our witnesses. The desire of your life is at length
accomplished, the prediction fulfilled, and you are wedded to royalty!"

As Thomas Seyton slowly uttered the concluding part of his speech, he
observed, with indescribable uneasiness, the want of all expression in
his sister's countenance, the marble features remained calm and
imperturbable, and her only sign of attending to her brother's words was
a sudden pressure of both hands to her heart, as if to still its
throbbing, or as though under the influence of some acute pain, while a
stifled cry escaped her trembling lips as she fell back in her chair.
But the feeling, whatever it was, soon passed away, and Sarah became
fixed, rigid, and tranquil, as before.

"Sister!" cried Seyton, "what ails you? Shall I call for assistance?"

"'Tis nothing! Merely the result of surprise and joy at the unhoped-for
tidings you have communicated to me. At last, then, the dearest wish of
my heart is accomplished!"

"I was not mistaken," thought Seyton, "ambition still reigns paramount
in her heart, and will carry her in safety through this trial. Well,
sister," said he, aloud, "what did I tell you?"

"You were right," replied she, with a bitter smile, as she penetrated
the workings of her brother's thoughts, "ambition has again stifled the
voice of maternal tenderness within me!"

"You will live long and happily to cherish and delight in your
daughter."

"Doubtless I shall, brother. See how calm I am!"

"Ah, but is your tranquillity real or assumed?"

"Feeble and exhausted, can you imagine it possible for me to feign?"

"You can now understand the difficulty I felt in breaking this news to
you?"

"Nay, I marvel at it, knowing as you did the extent of my ambition.
Where is the prince?"

"He is here."

"I would fain see and speak with him before the ceremony." Then, with
affected indifference, she added, "And my daughter is also here, as a
matter of course?"

"She is not here at present; you will see her by and by."

"True, there is no hurry; but send for the prince, I entreat of you."

"Sister, I know not why, but your manner alarms me, and there is a
strangeness in your very looks as well as words!"

And Seyton spoke truly. The very absence of all emotion in Sarah
inspired him with a vague and indefinable uneasiness; he even fancied he
saw her eyes filled with tears she hastily repressed. But unable to
account for his own suspicions, he at once quitted the chamber.

"Now, then," said Sarah, "if I may but see and embrace my daughter, I
shall be satisfied. I fear there will be considerable difficulty in
obtaining that happiness; Rodolph will refuse me, as a punishment for
the past. But I must and will accomplish my longing desire! Oh, yes! I
cannot--will not be denied! But the prince comes!"

Rodolph entered, and carefully closed the door after him. Addressing
Sarah in a cold, constrained manner, he said:

"I presume your brother has told you all?"

"He has!"

"And your ambition is satisfied."

"Quite--quite satisfied?"

"Every needful preparation for our marriage has been made; the minister
and attesting witnesses are in the next room."

"I know it."

"They may enter, may they not, madame?"

"One word, my lord. I wish to see my daughter."

"That is impossible!"

"I repeat, my lord, that I earnestly desire to see my child."

"She is but just recovering from a severe illness, and she has undergone
one violent shock to-day; the interview you ask might be fatal to her."

"Nay, my lord, she may be permitted to embrace her mother without danger
to herself."

"Why should she run the risk? You are now a sovereign princess!"

"Not yet, my lord; nor do I intend to be until I have embraced my
daughter!"

Rodolph gazed on the countess with unfeigned astonishment.

"Is it possible," cried he, "that you can bring yourself to defer the
gratification of your pride and ambition?"

"Till I have indulged the greater gratification of a mother's feelings.
Does that surprise you, my lord?"

"It does indeed!"

"And shall I see my daughter?"

"I repeat--"

"Have a care, my lord,--the moments are precious,--mine are possibly
numbered! As my brother said, the present trial may kill or cure me. I
am now struggling, with all my power, with all the energy I possess,
against the exhaustion occasioned by the discovery just made to me. I
demand to see my daughter, or otherwise I refuse the hand you offer me,
and, if I die before the performance of the marriage ceremony, her birth
can never be legitimised!"

"But Fleur-de-Marie is not here; I must send for her."

"Then do so instantly, and I consent to everything you may propose; and
as, I repeat, my minutes are probably numbered, the marriage can take
place while they are conducting my child hither."

"Although 'tis a matter of surprise to hear such sentiments from you,
yet they are too praiseworthy to be treated with indifference. You shall
see Fleur-de-Marie; I will write to her to come directly."

"Write there--on that desk--where I received my death-blow!"

While Rodolph hastily penned a few lines, the countess wiped from her
brows the cold damps that had gathered there, while her hitherto calm
and unmovable features were contracted by a sudden spasmodic agony,
which had increased in violence from having been so long concealed. The
letter finished, Rodolph arose and said to the countess:

"I will despatch this letter by one of my aides-de-camp; she will be
here in half an hour from the time my messenger departs. Shall I, upon
my return to you, bring the clergyman and persons chosen to witness our
marriage, that we may at once proceed?"

"You may,--but no, let me beg of you to ring the bell; do not leave me
by myself; let Sir Walter despatch the letter, and then return with the
clergyman."

Rodolph rang; one of Sarah's attendants answered the summons.

"Request my brother to send Sir Walter Murphy here," said the countess,
in a faint voice. The woman went to perform her mistress's bidding.
"This marriage is a melancholy affair, Rodolph," said the countess,
bitterly, "I mean as far as I am concerned; to you it will be productive
of happiness." The prince started at the idea. "Nay, be not astonished
at my prophesying happiness to you from such a union; but I shall not
live to mar your joys."

At this moment Murphy entered.

"My good friend," said the prince, "send this letter off to my daughter.
Colonel ---- will be the bearer of it, and he can bring her back in my
carriage; then desire the minister and all concerned in witnessing the
marriage ceremony to assemble in the adjoining room."

"God of mercy!" cried Sarah, fervently clasping her hands as the squire
disappeared, "grant me strength to fold my child to my heart! Let me not
die ere she arrives!"

"Alas! why were you not always the tender mother you now are?"

"Thanks to you, at least, for awakening in me a sincere repentance for
the past, and a hearty desire to devote myself to the good of those
whose happiness I have so fearfully disturbed! Yes, when my brother told
me, a short time since, of our child's preservation,--let me say our
child, it will not be for long I shall require your indulgence,--I felt
all the agony of knowing myself irrecoverably ill, yet overjoyed to
think that the birth of our child would be legitimised; that done, I
shall die happy!"

"Do not talk thus."

"You will see I shall not deceive you again; my death is certain."

"And you will die without one particle of that insatiate ambition which
has been your return! By what fatality has your repentance been delayed
till now?"

"Though tardy, it is sincere; and I call Heaven to witness that, at
this awful moment, I bless God for removing me from this world, and that
I am spared the additional misery of living, as I am aware I should have
been a weight and burden to you, as well as a bar to your happiness
elsewhere. But can you pardon me? For mercy's sake, say you do! Do not
delay to speak forgiveness and peace to my troubled spirit until the
arrival of my child, for in her presence you would not choose to
pronounce the pardon of her guilty mother. It would be to tell her a
tale I would fain she never knew. You will not refuse me the hope that,
when I am gone, my memory may be dear to her?"

"Tranquillise yourself, she shall know nothing of the past."

"Rodolph, do you too say I am forgiven! Oh, forgive me--forgive me! Can
you not pity a creature brought low as I am? Alas, my sufferings might
well move your heart to pity and to pardon!"

"I do forgive you from my innermost soul!" said the prince, deeply
affected.

The scene was most heartrending. Rodolph opened the folding-doors, and
beckoned in the clergyman with the company assembled there, that is to
say, Murphy and Baron de Graün as witnesses on the part of Rodolph, and
the Duc de Lucenay and Lord Douglas on the part of the countess; Thomas
Seyton followed close behind. All were impressed with the awful
solemnity of the melancholy transaction, and even M. de Lucenay seemed
to have lost his usual petulance and folly.

The contract of marriage between the most high and powerful Prince
Gustave Rodolph, fifth reigning Duke of Gerolstein, and Sarah Seyton of
Halsburg, Countess Macgregor, which legitimised the birth of
Fleur-de-Marie, had been previously drawn up by Baron de Graün, and,
being read by him, was signed by the parties mentioned therein, as well
as duly attested by the signature of their witnesses.

Spite of the countess's repentance, when the clergyman, in a deep solemn
voice, inquired of Rodolph whether his royal highness was willing to
take Sarah Seyton of Halsburg, Countess Macgregor, for his wife, and the
prince had replied in a firm, distinct voice, "I will," the dying eyes
of Sarah shone with unearthly brilliancy, an expression of haughty
triumph passed over her livid features,--the last flash of expiring
ambition.

Not a word was spoken by any of the spectators of this mournful
ceremony, at the conclusion of which the four witnesses, bowing with
deep but silent respect to the prince, quitted the room.

"Brother," said Sarah, in a low voice, "request the clergyman to
accompany you to the adjoining room, and to have the goodness to wait
there a moment."

"How are you now, my dear sister?" asked Seyton. "You look very pale."

"Nay," replied she, with a haggard smile, "fear not for me; am I not
Grand Duchess of Gerolstein?" Left alone with Rodolph, Sarah murmured in
a feeble and expiring voice, while her features underwent a frightful
change, "I am dying; my powers are exhausted! I shall not live to kiss
and bless my child!"

"Yes, yes, you will. Calm yourself; she will soon be here."

"It will not be! In vain I struggle against the approach of Death. I
feel too surely his icy hand upon me; my sight grows dim; I can scarcely
discern even you."

"Sarah!" cried the prince, chafing her damp, cold hands with his. "Take
courage, she will soon be here; she cannot delay much longer!"

"The Almighty has not deemed me worthy of so great a consolation as the
presence of my child!"

"Hark, Sarah! Methinks I hear the sound of wheels. Yes, 'tis she,--your
daughter comes!"

"Promise me, Rodolph, she shall never know the unnatural conduct of her
wretched but repentant mother," murmured the countess, in almost
inarticulate accents.

The sound of a carriage rolling over the paved court was distinctly
heard, but the countess had already ceased to recognise what was passing
around her, her words became more indistinct and incoherent. Rodolph
bent over her with anxious looks; he saw the rising films of death veil
those beautiful eyes, and the exquisite features grow sharp and rigid
beneath the touch of the king of terrors.

"Forgive me,--my child! Let me--see--my--child! Pardon--at least!
And--after--death--the honours--due--to my--rank--" she faintly said,
and these were the last articulate words she uttered,--the one, fixed,
dominant passion of her life mingled, even in her last moments, with the
sincere repentance she expressed and, doubtless, felt. Just at that
awful moment Murphy entered.

"My lord," cried he, "the Princess Marie is arrived!"

"Let her not enter this sad apartment. Desire Seyton to bring the
clergyman hither." Then pointing to Sarah, who was slowly sinking into
her last moments, Rodolph added, "Heaven has refused her the
gratification of seeing her child!"

Shortly after that the Countess Sarah Macgregor breathed her last.




CHAPTER VIII.

BICÊTRE.


A fortnight had elapsed since Sarah's death, and it was mid-Lent Sunday.
This date established, we will conduct the reader to Bicêtre, an immense
building, which, though originally designed for the reception of insane
persons, is equally adapted as an asylum for seven or eight hundred poor
old men, who are admitted into this species of civil invalid hospital
when they have reached the age of seventy years, or are afflicted with
severe infirmities.

The entrance to Bicêtre is by a large court, planted with high trees,
and covered in the centre by a mossy turf, intersected with flower beds
duly cultivated. Nothing can be imagined more healthful, calm, or
cheerful than the promenade thus devoted to the indigent old beings we
have before alluded to. Around this square are the spacious and airy
dormitories, containing clean, comfortable beds; these chambers form the
first floor of the building, and immediately beneath them are the neatly
kept and admirably arranged refectories, where the assembled community
of Bicêtre partake of their common meal, excellent and abundant in its
kind, and served with a care and attention that reflects the highest
praise on the directors of this fine institution.

In conclusion of this short notice of Bicêtre, we will just add that at
the period at which we write the building also served as the abode of
condemned criminals, who there awaited the period of their execution.

It was in one of the cells belonging to the prison that the Widow
Martial and Calabash were left to count the hours till the following
day, on which they were to suffer the extreme penalty of the law.

Nicholas, the Skeleton, and several of the same description of ruffians
had contrived to escape from La Force the very night previous to the day
on which they were to have been transferred to Bicêtre.

Eleven o'clock had just struck as two _fiacres_ drew up before the outer
gate; from the first of which descended Madame Georges, Germain, and
Rigolette, and from the second Louise Morel and her mother. Germain and
Rigolette had now been married for some fifteen days.

We must leave the reader to imagine the glow of happiness that
irradiated the fair face of the grisette, whose rosy lips parted but to
smile, or to lavish fond words upon Madame Georges, whom she took every
occasion of calling "her dear mother." The countenance of Germain
expressed a more calm and settled delight. With his sincere affection
for the merry-hearted being to whom he was united was mingled a deep and
grateful sense of the kind and disinterested conduct of Rigolette
towards him when in prison, although the charming girl herself seemed to
have completely forgotten all about it, and even when Germain spoke of
those days she would entreat him to change the subject, upon the plea of
finding all such recollections so very dull and dispiriting. Neither
would the pretty grisette substitute a bonnet for the smart little cap
worn before her marriage, and certainly never was humility and avoidance
of pretension better rewarded; for nothing could have been invented more
becoming to the piquant style of Rigolette's beauty than the simple cap
_à la paysanne_, trimmed with a large orange-coloured rosette at each
side, contrasting so tastefully with the long tresses of her rich dark
hair, now worn in long hanging curls; for, as she said, "she could now
allow herself to take a little pains with her appearance."

The fair bride wore a handsome worked muslin collar, while a scarf, of
similar colour to the trimmings of her cap, half concealed her graceful,
pliant figure, which, notwithstanding her having leisure to adorn
herself, was still unfettered by the artificial restraints of stays;
although the tight gray silk dress she wore fitted without a fold or a
crease over her lightly rounded bosom, resembling the beautiful statue
of Galatea in marble. Madame Georges beheld the happiness of the newly
married pair with a delight almost equal to their own.

As for Louise Morel, she had been set at liberty after undergoing a most
searching investigation, and when a post-mortem examination of her
infant had proved that it had come to its death by natural means; but
the countenance of the poor victim of another's villainy had lost all
the freshness of youth, and bore the impress of deep sorrow, now
softened and subdued by gentleness and resignation. Thanks to Rodolph,
and the excellent care that had been taken of her through his means, the
mother of Louise, who accompanied her, had entirely recovered her
health.

Madame Georges having informed the porter at the lodge that she had
called by the desire of one of the medical officers of the
establishment, who had appointed to meet herself and the friends by whom
she was accompanied at half past eleven o'clock, she was requested to
choose whether she would await the doctor within doors or in the large
square before the building; determining to do the latter, and supporting
herself on the arm of her son, while the wife of Morel walked beside
her, she sauntered along the shady alleys that bordered this delightful
spot, Louise and Rigolette following them.

"How very glad I am to see you again, dear Louise," said the bride.
"When we came to fetch you on our arrival from Bouqueval, I wanted to
run up-stairs to you, but my husband would not let me; he said I should
tire myself, so I stayed in the coach, and that is the reason why we
meet now for the first time since--"

"You so kindly came to console me in prison, Mlle. Rigolette," cried
Louise, deeply affected. "You are so feeling for all in trouble, whether
of body or mind!"

"In the first place, my dear Louise," replied the grisette, hastily
interrupting praises that were to her oppressive, "I am not Mlle.
Rigolette any longer, but Madame Germain. I do not know whether you
heard--"

"That you were married? Oh, yes, I did. But pray let me thank you as you
deserve."

"Ah, but Louise," persisted Madame Germain, "I am quite sure you have
not learnt all the particulars; how my marriage is all owing to the
generosity of him who was at once the protector and benefactor of
yourself and family, Germain, his mother, and my own self."

"Ah, yes, M. Rodolph,--we bless his name morning and evening. When I
came out of prison the lawyer who had been to see me from time to time,
by M. Rodolph's order, told me that, thanks to the same kind friend who
had already interested himself so much for us, M. Ferrand (and here at
the very mention of the name an involuntary shudder passed over the poor
girl's frame) had settled an annuity on my poor father and myself,--some
little reparation for the wrongs he had done us. You are aware that my
poor dear father is still confined here, though still improving in
health."

"And I also know that the kind doctor who has appointed our being here
to-day even hopes your dear parent may be enabled to return with you to
Paris; he thinks that it will be better to take some decided steps to
throw off this malady, and that the unexpected presence of persons your
father was in the daily habit of seeing may produce the most favourable
effects,--perhaps cure him; and that is what I think will be the case."

"Ah, mademoiselle, I dare not hope for so much happiness."

"Madame Germain, my dear Louise, if it is all the same to you; but to go
on with what I was telling you, you have no idea, I am sure, who M.
Rodolph really is?"

"Yes, I have,--the friend and protector of all who are unhappy."

"True, but that is not all. Well, as I see you really are ignorant of
many things concerning our benefactor, I will tell you all about it."

Then addressing her husband, who was walking before her with Madame
Georges, she said, "Don't walk so very fast, Germain, you will tire our
mother!" And, with a look of proud satisfaction, she said, turning to
Louise, "Does not he deserve to have a good wife? See how attentive he
is to his mother! He certainly is very handsome, too,--a thousand times
more so than Cabrion, or M. Girandeau, the travelling clerk! You
remember him, don't you, Louise?

"Talking of Cabrion puts me in mind to ask you whether M. Pipelet and
his wife have arrived yet? The doctor wished them to come here to-day
with us, because your father has talked much about them during his
wanderings."

"No, they are not here at present, but they will not be long. When we
called for them they had already set out."

"And then as for being punctual in keeping an appointment, M. Pipelet is
as exact as a clock to the hour and minute! But let me tell you a little
more about my marriage and M. Rodolph. Only think, Louise, it was he who
sent me with the order for Germain's liberation! You can imagine our
delight at quitting that horrid prison. Well, we went home to my room,
and there Germain and I together prepared a nice little bit of dinner;
but, bless you! we might just as well have spared ourselves the trouble,
for, after it was ready, neither of us could eat a bit for joy. When
evening came Germain left me, promising to return the next day.

"Well, at five o'clock next morning, I got up and sat down to my work,
for I was terribly behindhand with it. As eight o'clock struck some one
knocked at the door; who should it be but M. Rodolph! Directly I saw
him, I began to thank him from the bottom of my heart for all he had
done for Germain and myself. He would not allow me to proceed. 'My kind
neighbour,' said he, 'I wish you to give this letter to Germain, who
will soon be here. Then you will take a _fiacre_, and proceed without
delay to a small village, near Ecouen, called Bouqueval. Once there,
inquire for Madame Georges; and I wish you all imaginable pleasure from
your trip.' 'M. Rodolph,' I said, 'pray excuse me, but that will make me
lose another day's work and I have already got two to make up for.'
'Make yourself perfectly easy, my pretty neighbour,' said he, you will
find plenty of work at Madame Georges's, I promise you; she will prove
an excellent customer, I have no doubt, and I have particularly
recommended you to her.' 'Oh, that alters the case, M. Rodolph, then I'm
sure I shall be but too glad to go.' 'Adieu, neighbour,' said M.
Rodolph. 'Good-bye,' cried I, 'and many thanks for so kindly
recommending me.'

"When Germain came, I told him all about it; so as we were quite sure M.
Rodolph would not send us upon any foolish errand, we set off as blithe
as birds. Only imagine, Louise, what a surprise awaited us on our
arrival! I declare I can scarcely think of it without tears of happiness
coming into my eyes. We went to the very Madame Georges you see walking
before us, and who should she turn out to be but the mother of Germain!"

"His mother?"

"Yes, his own very mother, from whom he had been taken when quite a
baby! You must try to fancy their mutual joy! Well, when Madame Georges
had wept over her son, and embraced and gazed at him a hundred times, my
turn came to be noticed.

"No doubt M. Rodolph had written something very favourable about me,
for, clasping me in her arms, she said, 'She was acquainted with my
conduct towards her son.' 'Then, mother,' interposed Germain, 'it only
rests with you to ask her, and Rigolette will be your child as well as
I.' 'And I do ask her to be my daughter with all my heart,' replied his
mother, 'for you will never find a better or a prettier creature to love
as your wife.'

"So there I was quite at home, in such a sweet farm, along with Germain,
his mother, and my birds; for I had taken the poor, little, dear things
with me, just to hear how delightedly they would sing when they found
themselves in the country. The days passed like a dream. I did only just
what I liked,--helped Madame Georges, walked about with Germain, and
danced and sung like a wild thing.

"Well, our marriage was fixed to take place on yesterday fortnight; the
evening before, who should arrive but a tall, elderly, bald-headed
gentleman, who looked so kind; and he brought me a _corbeille de
mariage_ from M. Rodolph. Only think, Louise, what a beauty it must have
been,--made like a large rosewood box, with these words written in
letters of gold, on medallion of blue china, 'Industry and
Prudence--Love and Happiness.' And what do you suppose this charming box
contained? Why, a number of lace caps similar to the one I have now on,
pieces for gowns, gloves, ornaments, a beautiful shawl, and this pretty
scarf. Oh, I thought I should lose my senses with delight! But that is
not all. At the bottom of the box I found a handsome pocketbook, with
these words written on a bit of paper affixed to it, 'From a friend to a
friend.' Inside were two folded papers, one addressed to Germain, and
the other to me. In that addressed to Germain was an order for his
appointment as director of a bank for the poor with a salary of four
thousand francs a year; while he found under the envelope, directed to
me, a money order for forty thousand francs on the treasury,--yes,
that's the word; it was called my marriage portion.

"I did not like to take so large a sum, but Madame Georges said to me,
'My dear child, you both can and must accept it, as a recompense for
your prudence, industry, and devotion to those who were in misfortune;
for did you not run the risk of injuring your health, and probably
deprive yourself of your only means of support, by sitting up all night
at work, in order to make up for the time you spent in attending to
others?'"

"Oh, that is quite true," exclaimed Louise, with fervour. "I do not
think there is any one upon earth who would have done all that you have
done, Mademoi--Madame Germain!"

"There's a good girl, she has learned her lesson at last! Well, I said
to the elderly gentleman that I did not merit such a reward, that what
little I had done was purely because it afforded me pleasure. To which
he answered, 'That makes no difference; M. Rodolph is immensely rich,
and he sends you this dowry as a mark of his friendship and esteem, and
your refusal of it would pain him very much indeed. He will himself be
present at your marriage, and then he will compel you to take it.'"

"What a blessing that so charitable a person as M. Rodolph should be
possessed of such riches!"

"Of course it is! But I haven't told you all yet. Oh, Louise, you never
can guess who and what M. Rodolph turns out to be; and to think of my
making him carry large parcels for me! But have a little patience, you
will hear about it directly.

"The night before the marriage the elderly gentleman came again very
late, and in great haste,--it was to tell us that M. Rodolph was ill,
and could not attend the wedding, but that his friend, the bald-headed
gentleman, would take his place. And then only, my dear Louise, did we
learn that our benefactor was--guess what--a prince! A prince, do I say?
Bless you, ever so much higher than that! A royal highness!--a reigning
duke!--a sort of a second-rate king! Germain explained all about his
rank to me!"

"M. Rodolph a prince!--a duke!--almost a king!"

"Just think of that, Louise! And imagine my having asked him to help me
to clean my room! A pretty state of confusion it threw me into when I
recollected all that, and how free I had spoken to him! So of course you
know when I found that he was as good as a king, I did not dare refuse
his gracious wedding present.

"Well, my dear, when we had been married about a week, M. Rodolph sent
us word that he should be glad if Germain, his mother, and myself would
pay him a wedding visit; so we did. I can tell you my heart beat as
though it would come through my side! Well, we stopped at a fine palace
in the Rue Plumet, and were ushered into a number of splendid
apartments, filled with servants in liveries, all covered with gold
lace, gentlemen in black, with silver chains around their necks and
swords by their sides, officers in rich uniforms, and all sorts of gay
looking people. The rooms we passed through were all gilt, and filled
with such beautiful things they quite dazzled my eyesight only to look
at them.

"At last we got to the apartment where the bald-headed old gentleman was
sitting, with a quantity of grand folks, all covered with gold lace and
embroidery. Well, when our elderly friend saw us, he rose and conducted
us to an adjoining room, where we found M. Rodolph--I mean the
prince--dressed so simply, and looking so good and kind--just like the
M. Rodolph we first knew--that I did not feel at all frightened at the
recollection of how I had set him to pin my shawl for me, mend my pens,
and walked with him arm in arm in the street, just like two equals, as,
certainly, then I thought we were."

"Oh, I should have trembled like a leaf if I had been you!"

"Well, I did not mind it at all, he smiled so encouragingly; and, after
kindly welcoming Madame Georges, he held out his hand to Germain, and
then said, smilingly, to me, 'Well, neighbour, and how are "Papa Crétu"
and "Ramonette?"' (Those were the names I called my birds by. Was it not
kind of him to recollect them?)

"'I feel quite sure,' added he, 'that yourself and Germain can sing as
merry songs as your birds.' 'Yes, indeed, my lord,' replied I (Madame
Georges had taught me as we came along how I was to address the prince),
'we are as happy as it is possible to be, and our happiness is the
greater because we owe it to you.'

"'Nay, nay, my good child,' said he, 'you may thank your own excellent
qualities and that of Germain for the felicity you enjoy,' etc. I need
not go on with that part of the story, Louise, because it would oblige
me to repeat all the charming praises I received; and, certainly, I
cannot recollect ever doing more than my strict duty, though the prince
was pleased to think differently.

"Well, we all came away more sorrowful than we went, for we found it was
to be our farewell visit to our benefactor, he being about to return to
Germany. Whether or not he has gone I cannot tell you, but, absent or
present, our most grateful remembrance and respectful esteem will ever
attend him.

"I forgot to tell you that a dear, good girl I knew when we were both in
prison together had been living at the farm with Madame Georges; it
seems my young friend had, fortunately, found a friend in M. Rodolph,
who had placed her there. But Madame Georges particularly cautioned me
not to say a word on the subject to the prince, who had some reason for
desiring it should not be talked about,--no doubt because he could not
bear his benevolent deeds should be known. However, I learnt one thing
that gave me extreme pleasure, that my sweet Goualeuse had found her
parents, and that they had taken her a great, great way from Paris; I
could not help feeling grieved, too, that I had not been able to wish
her good-bye before she went.

"But forgive me, dear Louise, for being so selfish as to keep talking to
you of every one's happiness when you have so much reason to be
sorrowful yourself."

"Had my child but been spared to me," said poor Louise, sadly, "it would
have been some consolation to me; for how can I ever hope to find any
honest man who would make me his wife, although I have got money enough
to tempt any one."

"For my part, Louise, I feel quite sure that one of these days I shall
see you happily married to a good and worthy partner, who will pity you
for your past troubles, and love and esteem you for the patience with
which you endured them."

"Ah, Madame Germain, you only say so to try and comfort me; but whether
you really believe what you say or no, I gratefully feel and thank you
for your kindness. But who are these? I declare, M. and Madame Pipelet!
How very gay he looks; so different from the sad, dejected appearance he
always wore, while M. Cabrion was tormenting him as he did!"

Louise was right. Pipelet advanced in high spirits, and as though
treading on air; on his head he wore the well-known bell-crowned hat, a
superb grass-green coat adorned his person, while a white cravat, with
embroidered ends, was folded around his throat, in such a manner as to
permit the display of an enormous collar, reaching nearly up to his
eyes, and quite concealing his cheeks. A large, loose waistcoat, of
bright buff, with broad maroon-coloured stripes, black trousers,
somewhat short for the wearer, snowy white stockings, and highly
polished shoes completed his equipment.

Anastasie displayed a robe of violet-coloured merino, tastefully
contrasted with a dark blue shawl. She proudly exhibited her freshly
curled Brutus wig to the gaze of all she met, while her cap was slung on
her arm by its bright green strings, after the manner of a reticule.

The physiognomy of Alfred--ordinarily so grave, thoughtful, and
dejected--was now mirthful, jocund, and hilarious. The moment he caught
a glimpse of Rigolette and Louise, he ran towards them, exclaiming in
his deep, sonorous voice, "Delivered! Gone!"

"How unusually joyful you seem, M. Pipelet," said Rigolette. "Do pray
tell us what has occasioned such a change in your appearance!"

"Gone! I tell you, mademoiselle,--or, rather, madame, as I may, do, and
ought to say, now that, like my Anastasie, you are tied up for life."

"You are very polite, M. Pipelet; but please to tell me who has gone?"

"Cabrion!" responded M. Pipelet, inspiring and respiring the air with a
look of indescribable delight, as though relieved of an enormous weight;
"he has quitted France for ever--for a perpetuity! At length he has
departed, and I am myself again."

"Are you quite sure he has gone?"

"I saw him with my eyes ascend the diligence, en route for Strasburg
with all his luggage and baggage; that is to say, a hat-case, a
maul-stick, and a box of colours."

"What is my old dear chattering about?" cried Anastasie, as she came
puffing and panting to the spot where the little group were assembled;
"I'll be bound he was giving you the history of Cabrion's going off--I'm
sure he has talked of nothing else all the way we came."

"Because I'm half wild with delight; I seem to have got into another
world,--such a lightness has come over me. A little while ago my hat
used to seem as though loaded with lead, and as if it pressed forwards
in spite of me; now I seem as though borne on the breeze towards the
firmament, to think that he is gone--actually set out--and never to
return!"

"Yes, the blackguard is off at last!" chimed in Madame Pipelet.

"Anastasie," cried her husband, "spare the absent! Happiness calls for
mercy and forbearance on our parts. I will obey its dictates, and merely
allow myself to remark that Cabrion was a--a--worthless scoundrel!"

"But how do you know that he has gone to Germany?" inquired Rigolette.

"By a friend of our 'king of lodgers.' Talking of that dear man, you
haven't heard that, owing to the handsome manner in which he recommended
us, Alfred has been appointed house-porter to a sort of charitable bank,
established in our house by a worthy Christian, who wishes, like M.
Rodolph, to do all the good he can?"

"Ah!" replied Rigolette. "And, perhaps, you don't know, either, that my
dear Germain is appointed manager of this same bank? All owing to the
kind intervention of M. Rodolph."

"Well, I never!" exclaimed Madame Pipelet, "all our good luck comes
together; and I'm sure I'm heartily glad we shall keep old friends and
acquaintances around us. I hate fresh faces, for my part. I'm certain I
would not change my old duck of a husband even for your young handsome
one, Madame Germain.

"But to go back to Cabrion. Only imagine a bald-headed, stout, elderly
gentleman, coming to tell us of Alfred's new situation, and at the same
time inquiring if a talented artist of the name of Cabrion did not once
lodge in the house with us. Oh, my poor darling! Directly Cabrion's name
was mentioned down went the boot he was mending, and if I had not
caught him he would have swooned away. But, fortunately, the bald
gentleman added, 'This young painter has been engaged by a very wealthy
person to do some work, which will occupy him for years, and he may,
very probably, establish himself in another country.' In confirmation of
which the old gentleman gave my Alfred the date of Cabrion's departure,
with the address of the office from which he started."

"And I had the unhoped-for satisfaction of reading on the ticket, 'M.
Cabrion, artist in painting, departs for Strasburg, and further, by the
company's diligence.' The hour named was for this morning. I need not
say I was in the inn yard with my wife."

"And there we saw the rascal take his seat on the box beside the
driver."

"Just as the vehicle was set in motion Cabrion perceived me, turned
around, and cried,'Yours for ever! I go to return no more.' Thank
heaven! The loud blast of the guard's horn nearly drowned these familiar
and insulting words, as well as any others he might have intended to
utter. But I pity and forgive the wretched man,--I can afford to be
generous, for I am delivered from the bane and misery of my life."

"Depend upon it, M. Pipelet," said Rigolette, endeavouring to restrain a
loud fit of laughter,--"depend upon it, you will see him no more. But
listen to me, and I will tell you something I am sure you are ignorant
of and which it will be almost difficult for you to credit. What do you
think of our M. Rodolph not being what we took him for, but a prince in
disguise,--a royal highness!"

"Go along with you!" said Anastasie. "That is a joke!"

"Oh, but really," cried Rigolette, "I am not joking; it is as true
as--as--that I am married to my dear Germain."

"Goodness gracious me!" exclaimed Anastasie. "My king of lodgers a royal
highness! Oh, dear, here's a pretty go! And I asked him to mind the
lodge for me. Oh, pardon! Pardon! Pardon!" And then, carried away by the
excess of her reverence and regret for having so undervalued a prince,
though a disguised one, Madame Pipelet placed her cap on her head, as
though she imagined herself in the presence of royalty.

Alfred, on the contrary, manifested his respect for royalty in a manner
diametrically the reverse of the form adopted by his wife. Snatching off
his hat, that hat which had never before been seen to quit his head, he
commenced bowing to empty space, as though standing in the presence of
the august personage he apostrophised, while he exclaimed, "Have I,
then, been honoured by a visit from royalty? Has my poor lodge been so
far favoured? And to think of his illustrious eyes having seen me in my
bed, when driven thither by the vile conduct of Cabrion!"

At this moment Madame Georges, turning around, cried out:

"My children, the doctor comes."

Doctor Herbin, the individual alluded to, was a man of about the middle
age, with a countenance expressive of great kindness and benevolence,
united to extreme skill and penetration in discovering the extent of
malady with which his unfortunate patients were affected. His voice,
naturally harmonious, assumed a tone of gentle suavity when he spoke to
the poor lunatics; who, however bereft of reason, seemed always to
listen with peculiar delight to his soft, soothing words, which
frequently had the effect of subduing the invariable irritability
attendant on this fearful complaint. M. Herbin had been among the first
to substitute, in his treatment of madness, sympathy and commiseration
for the frightful remedies ordinarily employed. He abandoned the
coercive system, so repugnant to every principle of humanity, for kind
words, conciliating looks, and a ready attention to every request that
could reasonably be granted. He banished chains, whips, drenching with
cold water, and even solitary confinement, except in cases of urgent
necessity.

"Monsieur," said Madame Georges, addressing the doctor, "I have ventured
hither with my son and daughter, although personally unknown to M.
Morel; but my interest in his unfortunate state made me desirous of
witnessing the experiment you are about to make to restore his reason.
You have every hope of succeeding, have you not?"

"I certainly reckon much, madame, on the good effects likely to be
produced by the sight of his daughter and the persons he has been in the
constant habit of seeing."

"When my husband was arrested," said Morel's wife, pointing to
Rigolette, "our kind young friend here was nursing me and my children."

"And my father knew M. Germain quite well," said Louise; then directing
the attention of M. Herbin to Alfred and Anastasie, she added, "Monsieur
and madame here were porters at the house, and assisted our family to
the utmost of their ability."

"I am greatly obliged to you, my worthy friend," said the doctor,
addressing Alfred, "for quitting your occupation to come hither; but I
see by your amiable countenance that you have cheerfully sacrificed your
time to visit your poor lodger here."

"Sir-r!" replied Pipelet, gravely bowing. "Men should help each other in
this sublunary world, and remember that all are brothers; added to which
your unfortunate patient was the very cream and essence of an honest
man, and therefore do I respect him."

"If you are not afraid, madame," said Doctor Herbin to Madame Georges,
"of the sight of the poor creatures here, we will cross some of the
yards leading to that part of the building where I have deemed it
advisable to remove Morel, instead of allowing him to accompany the
others to the farm as usual."

"The farm!" exclaimed Madame Georges. "Have you a farm here?"

"Your surprise is perfectly natural, madame. Yes, we have a farm, the
produce of which is most serviceable to the establishment, although
entirely worked by the patients."

"Is it possible? Can you make these lunatics work, and allow them to be
at liberty while they do so?"

"Certainly; exercise, the calm tranquillity of the fields, with the
aspect of nature, are among our most certain means of cure. Only one
keeper goes with them, and we have rarely had an instance of any patient
endeavouring to get away; they are delighted to be employed, and the
trifling reward they gain serves still to improve their condition, by
enabling them to purchase different little indulgences. But we have
reached the gate conducting to one of these courts." Then perceiving a
slight appearance of alarm on the countenance of Madame Georges, the
doctor added, "Lay aside all apprehension, madame; in a very few minutes
you will feel as tranquil as I do myself."

"I follow you, sir. Come, my children."

"Anastasie," whispered Pipelet, "when I think that, had the persecutions
of that odious Cabrion continued, your poor dear Alfred might have
become mad, like the unhappy wretches we are about to behold, clad in
the most wild and singular state, chained up by the middle, or confined
in dens like the wild beasts in the 'Jardin des Plantes--'"

"Oh, bless your dear old heart, don't talk of such a thing! La! I've
heard say that them as has gone mad for love are for all the world like
born devils directly they see a woman; dashing against the bars of their
dens, and making all sorts of horrid noises, till the keepers are
forced to flog them till they drop, or else turn great taps of water on
their heads before they can quiet them."

"Anastasie," rejoined Pipelet, gravely, "I desire you will not go too
close to these dreadful creatures, an accident so soon happens."

"Besides," answered Anastasie, with a tone of sentimental melancholy,
"poor things, I have no business to show myself just for the sake of
tantalising them. 'Tis woman's beauty and fascination reduces them to
this horrid state. I declare I feel a cold shudder creep over me as I
reflect that, perhaps, if I had refused to make you a happy man, Alfred,
you might at this very minute be raving mad for love, and shut up in one
of these dens, roaring out the moment you caught sight of a woman; while
as it is, my poor old duck is glad to get out of the way of the naughty
females that will be trying to make him notice them."

"'Tis true, my modesty is easily alarmed. But, Anastasie, the door
opens, I tremble with dread of what we are about to witness; no doubt
the most hideous looking people, and all sorts of dreadful noises,
rattling of chains, and grinding of teeth."

The door being opened admitted them into a long courtyard, planted with
rows of trees, under which benches were placed. On each side was a
well-constructed and spacious portico, or covered stone terrace, with
which a range of large, airy cells communicated. A number of men, all
alike clad in a gray dress, were walking, talking, or conversing in this
pleasant retreat, while others were seated on the benches, enjoying the
refreshing shade and fresh open air.

At the sight of Doctor Herbin a number of the unfortunate lunatics
pressed around him, with every manifestation of joy and delight,
extending to him their hands with an expression of grateful confidence,
to which he cordially responded, by saying:

"Good day--good day, my worthy fellows! I am glad to see you all so well
and happy."

Some of the poor lunatics, too far from the doctor to be able to seize
his hand, ventured, with a sort of timid hesitation, to offer theirs to
the persons who were with him.

"Good morning, friends," said Germain, shaking hands in a manner so
cordial as to fill the unfortunate beings with happiness.

"Are these the mad patients?" inquired Madame Georges.

"Nearly the worst belonging to the establishment," answered the doctor,
smiling; "they are permitted to be together during the day, but at night
they are locked up in the cells you see there."

"Can it be possible that these men are really mad! But when are they
violent?"

"Generally at the first outbreak of their malady, when they are brought
here. After a short time the soothing treatment they experience, with
the society of their companions, calms and amuses them, so that their
paroxysms become milder and less frequent, until at length, by the
blessing of God, they recover their senses."

"What are those individuals talking so earnestly about?" inquired Madame
Georges. "One of them seems referring to a blind man, who, in addition
to the loss of sight, seems likewise deprived of speech and reason. Have
you such a one among your patients, or is the existence of this person
but a mere coinage of the brain?"

"Unhappily, madame, it is a fact but too true, and the history connected
with it is a most singular one. The blind man concerning whom you
inquire was found in a low haunt in the Champs Elysées, in which a gang
of robbers and murderers of the worst description were apprehended; this
wretched object was discovered, chained in the midst of an underground
cave, and beside him lay stretched the dead body of a woman, so
horribly mutilated that it was wholly impossible to attempt to identify
it. The man himself was hideously ugly, his features being quite
destroyed by the application of vitriol. He has never uttered a single
word since he came hither; whether his dumbness be real or affected I
know not, for, strange to say, his paroxysms always occur during the
night, and when I am absent, so as to baffle all conjecture as to his
real situation; but his madness seems occasioned by violent rage, the
cause of which we cannot find out, for, as I before observed, he never
speaks or utters an articulate sound. But here he is."

The whole of the party accompanying the doctor started with horror at
the sight of the Schoolmaster, for he it was, who merely feigned being
dumb and mad to procure his own safety. The dead body found beside him
was that of the Chouette, whom he had murdered, not during a paroxysm of
madness, but while under the influence of such a burning fever of the
brain as had produced the fearful dream he had dreamed the night he
passed at the farm of Bouqueval.

After his apprehension in the vaults of the tavern in the Champs
Elysées, the Schoolmaster had awakened from his delirium to find himself
a prisoner in one of the cells of the Conciergerie, where mad persons
are temporarily placed under restraint. Hearing all about him speak of
him as a raving and dangerous lunatic, he resolved to continue to enact
the part, and even feigned absolute dumbness for the purpose of avoiding
the chance of any questions being attempted to be put to him.

His scheme succeeded. When removed to Bicêtre he affected occasional
fits of furious madness, taking care always to select the night for
these outrageous bursts, the better to escape the vigilant eye of the
head surgeon; the house doctor, hastily summoned, never arriving in time
to witness either the beginning or ending of these attacks.

The few of his accomplices who knew either his name, or the fact of his
having escaped from the galleys at Rochefort, were ignorant of what had
become of him; and even if they did, what interest could they have in
denouncing him? Neither would it have been possible to establish his
identity--burnt and mutilated as he was--with the daring felon of
Rochefort. He hoped, therefore, by continuing to act the part of a
madman, to be permitted to abide permanently at Bicêtre; such was now
the only desire of the wretch, unable longer to indulge his appetite for
sinful and violent deeds.

During the solitude in which he lived in Bras Rouge's cellar, remorse
gradually insinuated itself into his strong heart; and, cut off from all
communication with the outer world, his thoughts fled inwards, and
presented him with ghastly images of those he had destroyed, till his
brain burned with its own excited torture.

And thus this miserable creature, still in the full vigour and strength
of manhood, before whom were, doubtless, long years of life, and
enjoying the undisturbed possession of his reason, was condemned to
linger out the remainder of his days as a self-imposed mute, and in the
company of fools and madmen; or if his imposition was discovered, his
murderous deeds would conduct him to a scaffold, or condemn him to
perpetual banishment among a set of villains, for whom his newly
awakened penitence made him feel the utmost horror.

The Schoolmaster was sitting on a bench; a mass of grizzled, tangled
locks hung around his huge and hideous head; leaning his elbow on his
knee, he supported his cheek in his hand. Spite of his sightless eyes
and mutilated features, the revolting countenance still expressed the
most bitter and overwhelming despair.

"Dear mother," observed Germain, "what a wretched looking object is this
unfortunate blind man!"

[Illustration: "The Schoolmaster Was Sitting on a Bench"
Original Etching by Porteau]

"Oh, yes, my son!" answered Madame Georges; "it makes one's heart ache
to behold a fellow creature so heavily afflicted. I know not when
anything has so completely shocked me as the sight of this deplorable
being."

Scarcely had Madame Georges given utterance to these words than the
Schoolmaster started, and his countenance, even despite its cicatrised
and disfigured state, became of an ashy paleness. He rose and turned his
head in the direction of Madame Georges so suddenly that she could not
refrain from faintly screaming, though wholly unsuspicious of who the
frightful creature really was; but the Schoolmaster's ear had readily
detected the voice of his wife, and her words told him she was
addressing her son.

"Mother!" inquired Germain, "what ails you? Are you ill?"

"Nothing, my son; but the sudden movement made by that man terrified me.
Indeed, sir," continued she, addressing the doctor, "I begin to feel
sorry I allowed my curiosity to bring me hither."

"Nay, dear mother, just for once to see such a place cannot hurt you!"

"I tell you what, Germain," interposed Rigolette, "I don't feel very
comfortable myself; and I promise you neither your mother nor I will
desire to come here again--it is too affecting!"

"Nonsense! You are a little coward! Is she not, M. le Docteur?"

"Why, really," answered M. Herbin, "I must confess that the sight of
this blind lunatic affects even me, who am accustomed to such things."

"What a scarecrow, old ducky! Isn't he?" whispered Anastasie; "but, la!
to my eyes every man looks as hideous as this dreadful blind creature in
comparison with you, and that is why no one can ever boast of my having
granted him the least liberty,--don't you see, Alfred?"

"I tell you what, Anastasie," replied Pipelet, "I shall dream of this
frightful figure. I know he will give me an attack of nightmare. I
won't eat tripe for supper till I have quite forgot him."

"And how do you find yourself now, friend?" asked the doctor of the
Schoolmaster; but he asked in vain, no attempt was made to reply. "Come,
come!" continued the doctor, tapping him lightly on the shoulder, "I am
sure you hear what I say; try to make me a sign at least, or
speak,--something tells me you can if you will!"

But the only answer made to this address was by the Schoolmaster
suddenly drooping his head, while from the sightless eyes rolled a tear.

"He weeps!" exclaimed the doctor.

"Poor creature!" murmured Germain, in a compassionate tone.

The Schoolmaster shuddered; again he heard the voice of his son,
breathing forth commiseration for his wretched, though unknown parent.

"What is the matter?" inquired the doctor; "what is it grieves you?"

But, without taking any notice of him, the Schoolmaster hid his face
with his hands.

"We shall make nothing of him," said the doctor. Then, perceiving how
painfully this scene appeared to affect Madame Georges, he added, "Now,
then, madame, we will go to Morel, and, if my expectations are
fulfilled, you will be amply rewarded for the pain you have felt
hitherto, in witnessing the joy of so good a husband and father in being
restored to his family."

With these words the doctor, followed by the party that had accompanied
him, proceeded on his way, leaving the Schoolmaster a prey to his own
distracting thoughts, the most bitter of which was the certainty of
having heard his son's voice, and that of his wife, for the last time.
Aware of the just horror with which he inspired them, the misery, shame,
and affright with which they would have heard the disclosure of his name
made him prefer a thousand deaths to such a revelation. One only, but
great, consolation remained in the certainty of having awakened the pity
of his son; and, with this thought to comfort him, the miserable being
determined to endure his sufferings with repentance and submission.

"We are now about to pass by the yard appropriated to the use of the
idiot patients," said the doctor, stopping before a large grated door,
through which the poor idiotic beings might be seen huddled together,
with every appearance of the most distressing imbecility.

Spite of Madame Georges's recent agitation, she could not refrain from
casting a glance through the railing.

"Poor creatures!" said she, in a gentle, pitying voice; "how dreadful to
think their sufferings are hopeless! for I presume there is no remedy
for such an affliction as theirs?"

"Alas, none, madame!" replied the doctor. "But I must not allow you to
dwell too long on this mournful picture of human misery. We have now
arrived at the place where I expect to find Morel, whom I desired should
be left entirely alone, in order to produce a more startling effect in
the little project on which I build my hopes for his restoration to
reason."

"What idea principally occupies his mind?" asked Madame Georges.

"He believes that if he cannot earn thirteen hundred francs by his day's
work, in order to pay off a debt contracted with one Ferrand, a notary,
his daughter will perish on a scaffold."

"That man Ferrand was, indeed, a monster!" exclaimed Madame Georges;
"poor Louise Morel and her father were not the only victims to his
villainy, he has persecuted my son with the bitterest animosity."

"I have heard the whole story from Louise," replied the doctor. "Happily
the wretch can no more wring your hearts with agony. But be so good as
to await me here while I go to ascertain the state of Morel." Then,
addressing Louise, he added, "You must carefully watch for my calling
out 'Come!' Appear instantly; but let it be alone. When I call out
'Come!' for the second time, the rest of the party may make their
appearance."

"Alas, sir, my heart begins to fail me!" replied Louise, endeavouring to
suppress her tears. "My poor father! What if the present trial fail!"

"Nay, nay, keep up your courage! I am most sanguine of success in the
scheme I have long meditated for the restoration of your father's
reason. Now, then, all you have to do for the present is carefully to
attend to my directions." So saying, the doctor, quitting his party,
entered a small chamber, whose grated window looked into the garden.

Thanks to rest, care, sufficiency of nourishing diet, Morel was no
longer the pale, careworn, haggard creature that had entered those
walls; the tinge of health began to colour his before jaundiced cheek,
but a melancholy smile, a fixed, motionless gaze, as though on some
object for ever present to his mental view, proved too plainly that
Reason had not entirely resumed her empire over him.

When the doctor entered, Morel was sitting at a table, imitating the
movements of a lapidary at his wheel.

"I must work," murmured he, "and hard, too. Thirteen hundred francs! Ay,
thirteen hundred is the sum required, or poor Louise will be dragged to
a scaffold! That must not be! No, no, her father will work--work--work!
Thirteen hundred francs! Right!"

"Morel, my good fellow," said the doctor, gently advancing towards him,
"don't work so very hard; there is no occasion now, you know that you
have earned the thirteen hundred francs you required to free Louise.
See, here they are!" and with these words the doctor laid a handful of
gold on the table.

"Saved! Louise saved!" exclaimed the lapidary, catching up the money,
and hurrying towards the door; "then I will carry it at once to the
notary."

"Come!" called out the doctor, in considerable trepidation, for well he
knew the success of his experiment depended on the manner in which the
mind of the lapidary received its first shock.

Scarcely had the doctor pronounced the signal than Louise sprang
forwards, and presented herself at the door just as her father reached
it. Bewildered and amazed, Morel let fall the gold he clutched in his
hands, and retreated in visible surprise. For some minutes he continued
gazing on his daughter with a stupefied and vacant stare, but by degrees
his memory seemed to awaken, and, cautiously approaching her, he
examined her features with a timid and restless curiosity.

Poor Louise, trembling with emotion, could scarcely restrain her tears;
but a sign from the doctor made her exert herself to repress any
manifestation of feeling calculated to disturb the progress of her
parent's thoughts.

Meanwhile Morel, bending over his daughter, and peering, with uneasy
scrutiny, into her countenance, became very pale, pressed his hands to
his brows, and then wiped away the large damp drops that had gathered
there. Drawing closer and closer to the agitated girl, he strove to
speak to her, but the words expired on his lips. His paleness increased,
and he gazed around him with the bewildered air of a person awakening
from a troubled dream.

"Good, good!" whispered the doctor to Louise; "now, when I say 'Come,'
throw yourself into his arms and call him 'father!'"

The lapidary, pressing his two hands on his breast, again commenced
examining the individual before him from head to foot, as if determined
to satisfy his mind as to her identity. His features expressed a painful
uncertainty, and, instead of continuing to watch the features of his
daughter, he seemed as if trying to hide himself from her sight, saying,
in a low, murmuring, broken tone:

"No, no! It is a dream! Where am I? It is impossible! I dream,--it
cannot be she!" Then, observing the gold strewed on the floor, he cried,
"And this gold! I do not remember,--am I then awake? Oh, my head is
dizzy! I dare not look,--I am ashamed! She is not my Louise!"

"Come!" cried the doctor, in a loud voice.

"Father! Dearest father!" exclaimed Louise. "Do you not know your
child,--your poor Louise?" And as she said these words she threw herself
on the lapidary's neck, while the doctor motioned for the rest of the
group to advance.

"Gracious heavens!" exclaimed Morel, while Louise loaded him with
caresses. "Where am I? What has happened to me? Who are all these
persons? Oh, I cannot--dare not believe the reality of what I see!"

Then, after a short silence, he abruptly took the head of Louise between
his two hands, gazed earnestly and searchingly at her for some moments,
then cried, in a voice tremulous with emotion, "Louise?"

"He is saved!" said the doctor.

"My dear Morel,--my dear husband!" exclaimed the lapidary's wife,
mingling her caresses with those of her daughter.

"My wife! My child and wife both here!" cried Morel.

"Pray don't overlook the rest of your friends, M. Morel," said
Rigolette, advancing; "see, we have all come to visit you at once!"

"I for one am delighted to renew my acquaintance with the worthy M.
Morel," said Germain, coming forward and extending his hand.

"And your old acquaintances at the lodge beg that they may not be
overlooked," chimed in Anastasie, leading Alfred up to the astonished
and delighted lapidary. "You know us, don't you, M. Morel,--the
Pipelets--the hearty old Pipelets, and your everlasting friends? Come,
pluck up courage, and look about you, M. Morel! Hang it all, Daddy
Morel, here's a happy meeting! May we see many such! _Ail-l-l-l-ez
donc!_"

"M. Pipelet and his wife! Everybody here! It seems to me so long
since--but--but no matter--'tis you, Louise, my child--'tis you, is it
not?" exclaimed he, joyfully pressing his daughter in his arms.

"Oh, yes, my dearest father, 'tis your own poor Louise! And there is my
mother; here are all our kind friends. You will never quit us more,
never know sorrow or care again, and henceforward we shall all be happy
and prosperous!"

"Happy? Let me try and recollect a little of past things. I seem to have
a faint recollection of your being taken to prison--and--and then,
Louise, all seems a blank and confusion here," continued Morel, pressing
his hand to his temples.

"Never mind all that, dearest father! I am here and innocent,--let that
comfort and console you."

"Stay, stay! That note of hand I gave! Ah, now I remember it all!" cried
the lapidary, with shuddering horror. Then, in a voice of assumed
calmness, he said, "And what has become of the notary?"

"He is dead, dearest father," murmured Louise.

"Dead? He dead? Then indeed I may hope for happiness! But where am I?
How came I here? How long have I left my home, and wherefore was I
brought hither? I have no recollection of any of these things!"

"You were extremely ill," said the doctor, "and you were brought here
for air and good nursing. You have had a severe fever, and been at times
a little lightheaded."

"Yes, yes, I recollect now; and when I was taken ill I remember I was
talking with my daughter, and some other person,--who could it be? Ah,
now I know!--a kind, good man, named M. Rodolph, who saved me from being
arrested. Afterwards, strange to say, I cannot recall a single
circumstance."

"Your illness was attended with an entire absence of memory," said the
doctor.

"And in whose house am I now?"

"In that of your friend, M. Rodolph," interposed Germain, hastily; "it
was thought that country air would be serviceable to you, and promote
your recovery."

"Excellent!" said the doctor, in a low tone; then speaking to a keeper
who stood near him, he said, "Send the coach around to the garden-gate
to prevent the necessity of taking our recovered patient through the
different courts, filled with those less fortunate than himself."

As frequently occurs in cases of madness, Morel had not the least idea
or recollection of the aberration of intellect under which he had
suffered.

Shortly afterwards, Morel, with his wife and daughter, ascended the
_fiacre_, attended also by a surgeon of the establishment, who, for
precaution's sake, was charged to see him comfortably settled in his
abode ere he left him; and in this order, and followed by a second
carriage, conveying their friends, the lapidary quitted Bicêtre without
entertaining the most remote suspicion of ever having entered it.

"And do you consider this poor man effectually cured?" asked Madame
Georges of the doctor, as he led her to the coach.

"I hope so, at least; and I wished to leave him wholly to the beneficial
effects of rejoining his family, from whom it would now be almost
dangerous to attempt to separate him; added to which, one of my pupils
will remain with him and give the necessary directions for his regimen
and treatment. I shall visit him myself daily, until his cure is
confirmed, for not only do I feel much interested in him, but he was
most particularly recommended to me when he first came here by the
_chargé d'affaires_ of the Grand Duke of Gerolstein."

A look of intelligence was exchanged between Germain and his mother.

Much affected with all they had seen and heard, the party now took leave
of the doctor, reiterating their gratification at having been present
during so gratifying a scene, and their grateful acknowledgments for the
politeness he had shown them in conducting them over the establishment.

As the doctor was reëntering the house, he was met by one of the
superior officers of the place, who said to him,--

"Ah, my dear M. Herbin, you cannot imagine the scene I have just
witnessed; it would have afforded an inexhaustible fund of reflection
for so skilful an observer as yourself."

"To what do you allude?"

"You are aware that we have here two females, a mother and a daughter,
who are condemned to death, and that their execution is fixed for
to-morrow. Well, in my life, I never witnessed such a cool indifference
as that displayed by the mother; she must be a female fiend!"

"You allude to the Widow Martial, I presume; what fresh act of daring
has she committed?"

"You shall hear. She had requested permission to share her daughter's
cell until the final moment arrived; her wish was complied with. Her
daughter, far less hardened than her parent, appeared to feel contrition
as the hour of execution approached, while the diabolical assurance of
the old woman seemed, if possible, to augment. Just now the venerable
chaplain of the prison entered their dungeon to offer to them the
consolations of religion. The daughter was about to accept them, when
the mother, without for one instant losing her coolness or frigid
self-possession, began to assail the chaplain with such insulting and
derisive language that the venerable priest was compelled to quit the
cell, after trying in vain to induce the violent and unmanageable woman
to listen to one word he said.

"It is a fearful fact connected with this family that a sort of
depravity seems to pervade it. The father was executed, a son is now in
the galleys, a second has only escaped a public and disgraceful end by
flight; while the eldest son and two young children have alone been able
to resist this atmosphere of moral contagion.

"What a singular circumstance connected with this double execution it is
that the day of mid-Lent should have been selected. At seven o'clock
to-morrow, the hour fixed, the streets will be filled with groups of
masqueraders, who, having passed the night at the different balls and
places of entertainment beyond the barriers, will be just returning
home; added to which, at the place of execution, the Barrière St.
Jacques, the noise of the revels still being kept up in honour of the
carnival can be distinctly heard."

       *       *       *       *       *

The following morning's sun rose bright and cloudless. At four o'clock
in the morning various troops of soldiers surrounded the approaches to
Bicêtre.

We shall now return to Calabash and her mother in their dungeon.




CHAPTER IX.

THE TOILET.


The condemned cell of Bicêtre was situated at the end of a gloomy
passage, into which a trifling portion of light and air was admitted by
means of small gratings let into the lower part of the wall. The cell
itself would have been wholly dark but for a kind of wicket, let into
the upper part of the door, which opened into the corridor before
mentioned.

In this wretched dungeon, whose crumbling ceiling, damp, mouldy walls,
and stone-paved floor struck a death-chill like that of the grave, were
confined the Widow Martial, and her daughter Calabash.

The harsh, angular features of the widow stood out amidst the imperfect
light of the place, cold, pale, and immovable as those of a marble
statue. Deprived of the use of her hands, which were fastened beneath
her black dress by the strait-waistcoat of the prison, formed of coarse
gray cloth and tightly secured behind her, she requested her cap might
be taken off, complaining of an oppression and burning sensation in her
head; this done, a mass of long, grizzled hair fell over her shoulders.

Seated at the side of her bed, she gazed earnestly and fixedly at her
daughter, who was separated from her by the width of the dungeon, and,
wearing like her mother the customary strait-waistcoat, was partly
reclining and partly supporting herself against the wall, her head bent
forward on her breast, her eye dull and motionless, and her breathing
quick and irregular. From time to time a convulsive tremor rattled her
lower jaw, while her features, spite of their livid hue, remained
comparatively calm and tranquil.

Within the cell, and immediately beneath the wicket of the entrance
door, was seated an old, gray-headed soldier, whose rough, sunburnt
features betokened his having felt the scorch of many climes, and borne
his part in numerous campaigns. His duty was to keep constant watch over
the condemned prisoners.

"How piercing cold it is here!" exclaimed Calabash; "yet my eyes burn in
my head, and I have a burning, quenchless thirst!" Then addressing the
bald-headed veteran, she said, "Water! Pray give me a drink of water!"

The old soldier filled a cup of water from a pitcher placed near him,
and held it to her lips. Eagerly swallowing the draught, she bowed her
head in token of thankfulness, and the soldier proceeded to offer the
same beverage to the mother.

"Would you not like to moisten your lips?" asked he, kindly.

With a rough, repulsive gesture, she intimated her disinclination, and
the old man sat down again.

"What's o'clock?" inquired Calabash.

"Nearly half past four," replied the soldier.

"Only three hours!" replied Calabash, with a sinister and gloomy smile.
"Three hours more! And then--" She could proceed no further.

The widow shrugged up her shoulders. Her daughter divined her meaning,
and said, "Ah, mother, you have so much more courage than I have,--you
never give way, you don't."

"Never!"

"I see it, and I know you too well to expect it. You look at this moment
as calm and collected as if we were sitting sewing by our own fireside.
Ah! those happy days are gone,--gone forever!"

"Folly! Why prate thus?"

"Nay, mother, I cannot bear to rest shut up with my own wretched
thoughts! It relieves my heart to talk of bygone times, when I little
expected to come to this."

"Mean, cowardly creature!"

"I know I am a coward, mother. I am afraid to die! Every one cannot
boast of your resolution. I do not possess it. I have tried as much as I
could to imitate you. I refused to listen to the priest because you did
not like it. Still I may have been wrong in sending the holy man away;
for," added the wretched creature, with a shudder, "who can tell what is
after death? Mother, do you hear me? After, I say! And it only wants--"

"Exactly three hours, and you will know all about it!"

"How can you speak so indifferently on such a dreadful subject? Yet true
enough; in three short hours, we who now sit talking to each other, who,
if at liberty, should ail nothing, but be ready to enjoy life, must die.
Oh, mother, can you not say one word to comfort me?"

"Be bold, girl, and die as you have lived, a true Martial!"

"You should not talk thus to your daughter," interposed the old soldier,
with a serious air; "you would have acted more like a parent had you
allowed her to listen to the priest when he came."

Again the widow contemptuously shrugged her shoulders, and, without
deigning to notice the soldier further than by bestowing on him a look
of withering contempt, she repeated to Calabash:

"Pluck up your courage, my girl, and let the world see that women have
more courage than men, with their priests and cowardly nonsense!"

"General Leblond was one of the bravest officers of the regiment he
belonged to. Well, this dauntless man fell at the siege of Saragossa,
covered with wounds, and his last expiring act was to sign himself with
the cross," said the veteran. "I served under him. I only tell you this
to prove that to die with a prayer on our lips is no sign of cowardice!"

Calabash eyed the bronzed features of the speaker with deep attention.
The scarred and weather-beaten countenance of the old man told of a life
passed in scenes of danger and of death, encountered with calm bravery.
To hear those wrinkled lips urging the necessity of prayer, and
associating religion with the memory of the good and valiant, made the
miserable, vacillating culprit think that, after all, there could be no
cowardice in recommending one's soul to the God who gave it, and
breathing a repentant supplication for the past.

"Alas, alas!" cried she. "Why did I not attend to what the priest had to
say to me? It could not have done me any harm, and it might have given
me courage to face that dreadful afterwards, that makes death so
terrible."

"What! Again?" exclaimed the widow, with bitter contempt. "'Tis a pity
time does not permit of your becoming a nun! The arrival of your brother
Martial will complete your conversion; but that honest man and excellent
son will think it sinful to come and receive the last wishes of his
dying mother!"

As the widow uttered these last words, the huge lock of the prison was
heard to turn with a loud sound, and then the door to open.

"So soon!" shrieked Calabash, with a convulsive bound. "Surely the time
here is wrong,--it cannot be the hour we were told! Oh, mother! Mother!
Must we die at least two hours before we expected?"

"So much the better if the executioner's watch deceives me! It will put
an end to your whining folly, which disgraces the name you bear!"

"Madame," said an officer of the prison, gently opening the door, "your
son is here,--will you see him?"

"Yes," replied the widow, without turning her head.

Martial entered the cell, the door of which was left open that those
without in the corridor might be within hearing, if summoned by the old
soldier, who still remained with the prisoners.

Through the gloom of the corridor, lighted only by the faint beams of
the early morning, and the dubious twinkling of a single lamp, several
soldiers and gaolers might be seen, the former standing in due military
order, the later sitting on benches.

Martial looked as pale and ghastly as his mother, while his features
betrayed the mental agony he suffered at witnessing so afflicting a
sight. Still, spite of all it cost him, as well as the recollection of
his mother's crimes and openly expressed aversion for himself, he had
felt it imperatively his duty to come and receive her last commands. No
sooner was he in the dungeon than the widow, fixing on him a sharp,
penetrating look, said, in a tone of concentrated wrath and bitterness,
with a view to rouse all the evil passions of her son's mind:

"Well, you see what the good people are going to do with your mother and
sister!"

"Ah, mother, how dreadful! Alas, alas! Have I not warned you that such
would be the end--"

Interrupting him, while her lips became blanched with rage, the widow
exclaimed:

"Enough! 'Tis sufficient that your mother and sister are about to be
murdered, as your father was!"

"Merciful God!" cried Martial. "And to think that I have no power to
prevent it! 'Tis past all human interference. What would you have me do?
Alas! Had you or my sister attended to what I said, you would not now
have been here."

"Oh, no doubt!" returned the widow, with her usual tone of savage irony.
"To you the spectacle of mine and your sister's sufferings is a matter
of delight to your proud heart; you can now tell the world without a
lie that your mother is dead,--you will have to blush for her no more!"

"Had I been wanting in my duty as a son," answered Martial, indignant at
the unjust sarcasms of his mother, "I should not now be here."

"You came but from curiosity! Own the truth if you dare!"

"No, mother! You desired to see me, and I obeyed your wish."

"Ah, Martial," cried Calabash, unable longer to struggle against the
agonising terror she endured, "had I but listened to your advice,
instead of being led by my mother, I should not be here!" Then losing
all further control of herself, she exclaimed, "'Tis all your fault,
accursed mother! Your bad example and evil counsel have brought me to
what I am!"

"Do you hear her?" said the widow, bursting into a fiendish laugh.
"Come, this will repay you for the trouble of paying us a last visit!
Your excellent sister has turned pious, repents of her own sins, and
curses her mother!"

Without making any reply to this unnatural speech, Martial approached
Calabash, whose dying agonies seemed to have commenced, and, regarding
her with deep compassion, said:

"My poor sister! Alas, it is now too late to recall the past!"

"It is never too late to turn coward, it seems!" cried the widow, with
savage excitement. "Oh, what a race you are! Happily Nicholas has
escaped; François and Amandine will slip through your fingers; they have
already imbibed vice enough, and want and misery will finish them!"

"Oh, Martial," groaned forth Calabash, "for the love of God, take care
of those two poor children, lest they come to such an end as mother's
and mine!"

"He may watch over them as much as he likes," cried the widow, with
settled hatred in her looks, "vice and destitution will have greater
effect than his words, and some of these days they will avenge their
father, mother, and sister!"

"Your horrible expectations, mother, will never be fulfilled," replied
the indignant Martial; "neither my young brother, sister, nor self have
anything to fear from want. La Louve saved the life of the young girl
Nicholas tried to drown, and the relations of the young person offered
us either a large sum of money or a smaller sum and some land at
Algiers; we preferred the latter, and to-morrow we quit Europe, with the
children, for ever."

"Is that absolutely true?" asked the widow of Martial, in a tone of
angry surprise.

"Mother, when did I ever tell you a falsehood?"

"You are doing so now to try and put me into a passion!"

"What, displeased to learn that your children are provided for?"

"Yes, to find that my young wolves are to be turned into lambs, and to
hear that the blood of father, mother, and sister have no prospect of
being avenged!"

"Do not talk so--at a moment like this!"

"I have murdered, and am murdered in my turn,--the account is even, at
any rate."

"Mother, mother, let me beseech you to repent ere you die!"

Again a peal of fiendish laughter burst from the pallid lips of the
condemned woman.

"For thirty years," cried she, "have I lived in crime; would you have me
believe that thirty years' guilt is to be repented of in three days,
with the mind disturbed and distracted by the near approach of death?
No, no, three days cannot effect such wonders; and I tell you, when my
head falls its last expression will be rage and hatred!"

"Brother, brother," ejaculated Calabash, whose brain began to wander,
"help, help! Take me from hence," moaned she in an expiring voice; "they
are coming to fetch me--to kill me! Oh, hide me, dear brother, hide me,
and I will love you ever more!"

"Will you hold your tongue?" cried the widow, exasperated at the
weakness betrayed by her daughter. "Will you be silent? Oh, you base,
you disgraceful creature! And to think that I should be obliged to call
myself your parent!"

"Mother," exclaimed Martial, nearly distracted by this horrid scene,
"will you tell me why you sent for me?"

"Because I thought to give you heart and hatred; but he who has not the
one cannot entertain the other. Go, coward, go!"

At this moment a loud sound of many footsteps was heard in the corridor;
the old soldier looked at his watch.

A rich ray of the golden brightness, which marked the rising of that
day's sun, found its way through the loopholes in the walls, and shed a
flood of light into the very midst of the wretched cell, rendered now
completely illumined by means of the opening of the door at the opposite
end of the passage to that in which the condemned cell was situated. In
the midst of this blaze of day appeared two gaolers, each bearing a
chair; an officer also made his appearance, saying to the widow in a
voice of sympathy:

"Madame, the hour has arrived."

The mother arose on the instant, erect and immovable, while Calabash
uttered the most piercing cries. Then four more persons entered the
cell; four of the number, who were very shabbily dressed, bore in their
hands packets of fine but very strong cord. The taller man of the party
was dressed in black, with a large cravat; he handed a paper to the
officer. This individual was the executioner, and the paper a receipt
signifying his having received two females for the purpose of
guillotining them. The man then took sole charge of these unhappy
creatures, and, from that moment, was responsible for them.

To the wild terror and despair which had first seized Calabash, now
succeeded a kind of stupefaction; and so nearly insensible was she that
the assistant executioners were compelled to seat her on her bed, and to
support her when there; her firmly closed jaws scarcely enabled her to
utter a sound, but her hollow eyes rolled vacantly in their sockets, her
chin fell listlessly on her breast, and, but for the support of the two
men, she would have fallen forwards a lifeless, senseless mass.

After having bestowed a last embrace on his wretched sister, Martial
stood petrified with terror, unable to speak or move, and as though
perfectly spellbound by the horrible scene before him.

The cool audacity of the widow did not for an instant forsake her; with
head erect, and firm, collected manner, she assisted in taking off the
strait-waistcoat she had worn, and which had hitherto fettered her
movements; this removed, she appeared in an old black stuff dress.

"Where shall I place myself?" asked she, in a clear, steady voice.

"Be good enough to sit down upon one of those chairs," said the
executioner, pointing to the seats arranged at the entrance of the
dungeon.

With unfaltering step, the widow prepared to follow the directions given
her, but as she passed her daughter she said, in a voice that betokened
some little emotion:

"Kiss me, my child!"

But as the sound of her mother's voice reached her ear, Calabash seemed
suddenly to wake up from her lethargy, she raised her head, and, with a
wild and almost frenzied cry, exclaimed:

"Away! Leave me! And if there be a hell, may it receive you!"

"My child," repeated the widow, "let us embrace for the last time!"

"Do not approach me!" cried the distracted girl, violently repulsing her
mother; "you have been my ruin in this world and the next!"

"Then forgive me, ere I die!"

"Never, never!" exclaimed Calabash; and then, totally exhausted by the
effort she had made, she sank back in the arms of the assistants.

A cloud passed over the hitherto stern features of the widow, and a
moisture was momentarily visible on her glowing eyeballs. At this
instant she encountered the pitying looks of her son. After a trifling
hesitation, during which she seemed to be undergoing some powerful
internal conflict, she said:

"And you?"

Sobbing violently, Martial threw himself into his mother's arms.

"Enough!" said the widow, conquering her emotion, and withdrawing
herself from the close embrace of her son; "I am keeping this gentleman
waiting," pointing to the executioner; then, hurrying towards a chair,
she resolutely seated herself, and the gleam of maternal sensibility she
had exhibited was for ever extinguished.

"Do not stay here," said the old soldier, approaching Martial with an
air of kindness. "Come this way," continued he, leading him, while
Martial, stupefied by horror, followed him mechanically.

The almost expiring Calabash having been supported to a chair by the two
assistants, one sustained her all but inanimate form, while the other
tied her hands behind with fine but excessively strong whipcord, knotted
into the most inextricable meshes, while with a cord of the same
description he secured her feet, allowing her just so much liberty as
would enable her to proceed slowly to her last destination. The widow
having borne a similar pinioning with the most imperturbable composure,
the executioner, drawing from his pocket a pair of huge scissors, said
to her with considerable civility:

"Be good enough to stoop your head, madame."

Yielding immediate obedience to the request, the widow said:

"We have been good customers to you; you have had my husband in your
hands, and now you have his wife and daughter!"

Without making any reply, the executioner began to cut the long gray
hairs of the prisoner very close, especially at the nape of the neck.

"This makes the third time in my life," continued the widow, with a
dismal smile, "that I have had my head dressed by a professor: when I
took my first communion the white veil was arranged; then on my
marriage, when the orange-flowers were placed there; and upon the
present occasion; upon my word, I hardly know which became me most. You
cannot guess what I am thinking of?" resumed the widow, addressing the
executioner, after having again contemplated her daughter.

But the man made her no sort of answer, and no sound was heard but that
of the scissors, and the sort of convulsive and hysterical sob that
occasionally escaped from Calabash.

At this moment a venerable priest approached the governor, and addressed
him in a low, earnest voice, the import of which was to express his
desire to make another effort to rescue the souls of the condemned.

"I was thinking that at five years old my daughter, whose head you are
going to cut off, was the prettiest child I ever saw, with her fair hair
and red cheeks. Who that saw her then would have said that--" She was
silent for a moment, and then said, with a burst of indescribable
laughter, "What a farce is destiny!"

At this moment the last of her hair was cut off.

"I have done, madame," said the executioner, politely.

"Many thanks; and I recommend my son Nicholas to you," said the widow;
"you will cut off his hair some day." A turnkey came in and said a few
words to her in a low tone. "No,--I have already said no!" she answered,
angrily.

The priest hearing these words, and seeing any further interference
useless, immediately withdrew.

"Madame, we are all ready to go. Will you take anything?" inquired the
executioner, civilly.

"No, I thank you; this evening I shall take a mouthful of earth." And
after this remark the widow rose firmly. Her hands were tied behind her
back, and a rope was also attached to each ankle, allowing her
sufficient liberty to walk. Although her step was firm and resolute, the
executioner and his assistant offered to support her; but she turned to
them disdainfully, and said, "Do not touch me, I have a steady eye and a
firm foot, and they will hear on the scaffold whether or not I have a
good voice." Calabash was carried away in a dying state.

After having traversed the long corridor, the funereal cortège ascended
a stone staircase, which led to an exterior court, where was a picquet
of _gens-d'armes_, a hackney-coach, and a long, narrow carriage with a
yellow body, drawn by three post-horses, who were neighing loudly.

"We shall not be full inside," said the widow, as she took her seat.

The two vehicles, preceded and followed by the picquet of
_gens-d'armes_, then quitted the outer gate of Bicêtre, and went quickly
towards the Boulevard St. Jacques.




CHAPTER X.

MARTIAL AND THE CHOURINEUR.


Before we proceed we have a few words to say as to the acquaintance
recently established between the Chourineur and Martial.

When Germain had left the prison, the Chourineur proved very easily that
he had robbed himself; and making a statement of his motive for this
singular mystification to the magistrate, he was set at liberty, after
having been severely admonished.

Desirous of recompensing the Chourineur for this fresh act of devotion,
Rodolph, in order to realise the wishes of his rough protégé, had lodged
him in the hôtel of the Rue Plumet, promising that he should accompany
him on his return to Germany.

The Chourineur's blind attachment to Rodolph was like that of a dog for
his master. When, however, the prince had found his daughter, all was
changed, and, in spite of his warm gratitude for the man who had saved
his life, he could not make up his mind to take with him to Germany the
witness of Fleur-de-Marie's fallen state; yet, determined to carry out
the Chourineur's wishes, he sent for him, and told him that he had still
another service to ask of him. At this the Chourineur's countenance
brightened up; but he was greatly distressed when he learned that he
must quit the hôtel that very day, and would not accompany the prince to
Germany.

It is useless to mention the munificent compensations which Rodolph
offered to the Chourineur,--the money he intended for him, the farm in
Algeria, anything he could desire. The Chourineur was wounded to the
heart, refused, and (perhaps for the first time in his life) wept.
Rodolph was compelled to force his presents on him.

Next day the prince sent for La Louve and Martial, and inquired what he
could do for them. Remembering what Fleur-de-Marie had told him of the
wild taste of La Louve and her husband, he proposed to the hardy couple
either a considerable sum of money, or half the sum and land in full
cultivation adjoining the farm he had bought for the Chourineur,
believing that by bringing them together they would sympathise, from
their desire to seek solitude, the one in consequence of the past, and
the other from the crimes of his family.

He was not mistaken. Martial and La Louve accepted joyfully; and then,
talking the matter over with the Chourineur, they all three rejoiced in
the prospects held out to them in Algeria. A sincere good feeling soon
united the future colonists. Persons of their class judge quickly of
each other, and like one another as speedily.

The Chourineur accompanied his new friend Martial to the Bicêtre and
awaited him in the hackney-coach, which conducted them back to Paris
after Martial, horror-struck, had left the dungeon of his mother and
sister.

The countenance of the Chourineur had completely changed; the bold
expression and jovial humour which usually characterised his harsh
features had given way to extreme dejection; his voice had lost
something of its coarseness; a grief of heart, until then unknown to
him, had broken down his energetic temperament. He looked kindly at
Martial, and said:

"Courage! You have done all that good intentions could do; it is ended.
Think now of your wife, and the children whom you have prevented from
becoming criminals like their father and mother. To-night we leave Paris
never to return to it, and you will never again hear of what so much
distresses you now."

"True--true! But, after all, they are my sister and mother!"

"Yes; but when things must be, we must submit!" said the Chourineur,
checking a deep sigh.

After a moment's silence, Martial said, kindly, "And I ought, in my
turn, to try and console you who are so sad. My wife and I hope that
when we have left Paris this will cease."

"Yes," said the Chourineur, with a shudder, "if I leave Paris!"

"Why, we go this evening!"

"Yes,--you do; you go this evening!"

"And have you changed your intention, then?"

"No! Yet, Martial, you'll laugh at me; but yet I will tell you all. If
anything happens to me it will prove that I am not deceived. When M.
Rodolph asked if we would go to Algeria together, I told you my mind at
once, and also what I had been."

"Yes, you did; let us mention it no more. You underwent your punishment,
and are now as good as any one. But, like myself, I can imagine you
would like to go and live a long way off, instead of living here, where,
however honest we may be, they might at times fling in your teeth a
misdeed you have atoned for and repented, and, in mine, my parents'
crimes, for which I am by no means responsible. The past is the past
between us, and we shall never reproach each other."

"With you and me, Martial, the past is the past; but, you see, Martial,
there is something above,--I have killed a man!"

"A great misfortune, assuredly; but, at the moment, you were out of
your senses,--mad. And besides, you have since saved the lives of other
persons, and that will count in your favour."

"I'll tell you why I refer to my misdeed. I used to have a dream, in
which I saw the sergeant I killed. I have not had it for a long time
until last night, and that foretells some misfortune for to-day. I have
a foreboding that I shall not quit Paris."

"Oh, you regret at leaving our benefactor! The thought of coming with me
to the Bicêtre agitated you; and so your dream recurred to you."

The Chourineur shook his head sorrowfully and said, "It has come to me
just as M. Rodolph is going to start,--for he goes to-day. Yesterday I
sent a messenger to his hôtel, not daring to go myself. They sent me
word that he went this morning at eleven o'clock by the barrier of
Charenton, and I mean to go and station myself there to try and see him
once more,--for the last time!"

"He seems so good that I easily understand your love for him."

"Love for him!" said the Chourineur, with deep and concentrated emotion.
"Yes, yes, Martial,--to lie on the earth, eat black bread, be his dog,
to be where he was, I asked no more. But that was too much,--he would
not consent."

"He has been very generous towards you!"

"Yet it is not for that I love him, but because he told me I had heart
and honour. Yes, and that at a time when I was as fierce as a brute
beast. And he made me understand what was good in me, and that I had
repented, and, after suffering great misery, had worked hard for an
honest livelihood, although all the world considered me as a thorough
ruffian,--and so, when M. Rodolph said these words to me, my heart beat
high and proudly, and from this time I would go through fire and water
to serve him."

"Why, it is because you are better than you were that you ought not to
have any of those forebodings. Your dream is nothing."

"We shall see. I shall not try and get into any mischief, for I cannot
have any worse misfortune than not to see again M. Rodolph, whom I hoped
never again to leave. I should have been in my way, you see, always with
him, body and soul,--always ready. Never mind, perhaps he was wrong,--I
am only a worm at his feet; but sometimes, Martial, the smallest may be
useful to the greatest."

"One day, perhaps, you may see him."

"Oh, no; he said to me, 'My good fellow, you must promise never to seek
nor see me,--that will be doing me a service.' So, of course, Martial, I
promised; and I'll keep my word, though it is very hard."

"Once at Algeria, you will forget all your vexations."

"Yes, yes; I'm an old trooper, Martial, and will face the Bedouins."

"Come, come, you'll soon recover your spirits. We'll farm and hunt
together, and live together, or separate, just as you like. We'll bring
up the children like honest people, and you shall be their uncle,--for
we are brothers, and my wife is good at heart; and so we'll be happy,
eh?" And Martial extended his hand to the Chourineur.

"So we will, Martial," was the reply; "and my sorrow will kill me, or I
shall kill my sorrow."

"It will not kill you. We shall pass our days together; and every
evening we will say, 'brother, thanks to M. Rodolph,'--that shall be our
prayer to, him."

"Martial, you comfort me."

"Well, then, that is all right; and as to that stupid-dream, you will
think no more of it, I hope?"

"I'll try."

"Well, then, you'll come to us at four o'clock; the diligence goes at
five."

"Agreed. But I will get out here and walk to the barrier at Charenton,
where I will await M. Rodolph, that I may see him pass."

The coach stopped, and the Chourineur alighted.




CHAPTER XI.

THE FINGER OF PROVIDENCE.


The Chourineur had forgotten that it was the day after mid-Lent, and was
consequently greatly surprised at the sight, at once hideous and
singular, which presented itself to his view when he arrived at the
exterior boulevard, which he was traversing to reach the barrier of
Charenton.

He found himself suddenly in the thickest of a dense throng of people,
who were coming out of the cabarets of the Faubourg de la Glacière, in
order to reach the Boulevard St. Jacques, where the execution was to
take place.

Although it was broad daylight, there was still heard the noisy music of
the public-houses, whence issued particularly the loud echoes of the
cornets-à-piston. The pencil of Callot, of Rembrandt, or of Goya is
requisite to limn the strange, hideous, and fantastical appearance of
this multitude.

Almost all of them, men, women, and children, were attired in old
masquerade costumes. Those who could not afford this expense had on
their clothes rags of bright colours. Some young men were dressed in
women's clothes, half torn and soiled with mud. All their countenances,
haggard from debauchery and vice, and furrowed by intoxication, sparkled
with savage delight at the idea that, after a night of filthy orgies,
they should see two women executed on the scaffold prepared for them.

The foul and fetid scum of the population of Paris,--this vast mob--was
formed of thieves and abandoned women, who every day tax crime for their
daily bread, and every evening return to their lairs with their vicious
spoils.[1]

  [1] It is calculated that there are in Paris 30,000 persons who
  have no other means of existence but theft.

The crowd entirely choked up the means of circulation, and, in spite of
his gigantic strength, the Chourineur was compelled to remain almost
motionless in the midst of this compact throng. He was, however, willing
to remain so, as the prince would not pass the barrier of Charenton
until eleven o'clock, and it was not yet seven; and he had a singular
spectacle before him.

In a large, low apartment, occupied at one end by musicians, surrounded
by benches and tables laden with the fragments of a repast, broken
plates, empty bottles, etc., a dozen men and women, in various disguises
and half drunk, were dancing with the utmost excitement that frantic and
obscene dance called _La Chahut_.

Amongst the dissipated revellers who figured in this saturnalia, the
Chourineur remarked two couples who obtained the most overwhelming
applause, from the revolting grossness of their attitudes, their
gesticulations, and their language. The first couple consisted of a man
disguised as a bear, and nearly covered with a waistcoat and trousers of
black sheepskin. The head of the animal, being too troublesome to carry,
had been replaced by a kind of hood with long hair, which entirely
covered his features; two holes for his eyes, and a long one for his
mouth, allowed him to see, speak, and breathe.

This man--one of the prisoners escaped from La Force (amongst whom were
Barbillon and the two murderers arrested at the ogress's at the
_tapis-franc_, at the beginning of this recital)--this man so masked was
Nicholas Martial, the son and brother of the two women for whom the
scaffold was prepared but a few paces distant.

Induced into this act of atrocious insensibility and infamous audacity
by one of his associates, this wretch had dared with this disguise to
join in the last revels of the carnival. The woman who danced with him,
dressed as a _vivandière_, wore a round leather cap with ragged ribands,
a kind of bodice of threadbare red cloth, ornamented with three rows of
brass buttons, a green skirt, and trousers of white calico. Her black
hair fell in disorder all about her head, and her haggard and swollen
features evinced the utmost effrontery and immodesty. The _vis-à-vis_ of
these dancers were no less disgusting.

The man, who was very tall, and disguised as Robert Macaire, had so
begrimed his features with soot that it was impossible to recognise him,
and, besides, a large bandage covered his left eye; the white of the
right eye being thus the more heightened, rendered him still more
hideous. The lower part of the Skeleton's countenance (for it was he)
disappeared in a high neckcloth made of an old red shawl.

Wearing an old, white, napless hat with a crushed side, dirty, and
without a crown, a green coat in rags, and tight mulberry-coloured
pantaloons, patched in every direction, and tied around the instep with
pieces of packthread, this assassin outraged the most _outré_ and
revolting attitudes of the _Chahut_, darting from right to left, before
and behind, his lanky limbs as hard as steel, and twisting and twining,
and springing and bounding with such vigour and elasticity, that he
seemed set in motion by steel springs.

A worthy coryphée of this filthy saturnalia, his lady partner, a tall
and active creature with impudent and flushed features, attired _en
débardeur_, wore a flat cap on one side of a powdered wig with a thick
pigtail, a waistcoat and trousers of worn green velvet, adjusted to her
shape by an orange scarf, with long ends flowing down her back.

A fat, vulgar, coarse woman, the brutal ogress of the _tapis-franc_, was
seated on one of the benches, holding on her knees the plaid cloaks of
this creature and the _vivandière_, whilst they were rivalling the
bounds, and jumps, and gross postures of the Skeleton and Nicholas
Martial.

Amongst the other dancers there was a lame boy, dressed like a devil, by
means of a black net vest, much too large for him, red drawers, and a
green mask hideous and grotesque. In spite of his infirmity, this little
monster was wonderfully agile, and his precocious depravity equalled, if
it could not exceed, that of his detestable companions, and he gambolled
as impudently as any of them before a fat woman, dressed as a
shepherdess, who excited her partner the more by her shouts of laughter.

No charge having been raised against Tortillard (our readers have
recognised him), and Bras Rouge having been for the while left in
prison, the boy, at his father's request, was reclaimed by Micou, the
receiver of the passage of the Brasserie, who had not been denounced by
his accomplices.

As secondary figures in this picture, let imagination conceive all there
is of the lowest, most shameful, and most monstrous, in this idle,
wanton, insolent, rapacious, atheistical, sanguinary assemblage of
infamy, which is most hostile to social order, and to which we would
call the attention of all thinking persons as our recital draws to a
close.

Excited by the shouts of laughter and the cheers of the mob assembled
around the windows, the actors in the infamous dance cried to the
orchestra for a finale galop. The musicians, delighted to reach the end
of their labours, complied with the general wish, and played a galoppade
with the utmost energy and rapidity. At this the excitement redoubled;
the couples encircled each other and dashed away, following the Skeleton
and his partner, who led off their infernal round amidst the wildest
cries and acclamations.

The crowd was so thick, so dense, and the evolutions so multiplied and
rapid, that these creatures, inflamed with wine, exercise, and noise,
their intoxication became delirious frenzy, and they soon ceased to have
space for their movements. The Skeleton then cried, in a breathless
voice, "Look out at the door! We will go out on to the boulevard."

"Yes, yes!" cried the mob at the windows; "a galop as far as the
Barrière St. Jacques!"

"The two 'mots' will soon be here."

"The headsman cuts double! How funny!"

"Yes, with a cornet-à-piston accompaniment."

"I'll ask the widow to be my partner."

"And I the daughter."

"Death to the informers!"

"Long live the prigs and lads of steel!" cried the Skeleton in a voice
of thunder, as he and the dancers, forcing their way in the midst of the
mass, set the whole body in motion; and then were heard cries, and
imprecations, and shouts of laughter, which had nothing human in their
sound.

Suddenly this uproar reached its height by two fresh incidents. The
vehicle which contained the criminals, accompanied by its escort of
cavalry, appeared at the angle of the boulevard, and then all the mob
rushed in that direction, shouting and roaring with ferocious delight.

At this moment, also, the crowd was met by a courier coming from the
Boulevard des Invalides, and galloping towards the Barrière de
Charenton. He was dressed in a light blue jacket with yellow collar,
with a double row of silver lace down the seams, but, as a mark of deep
mourning, he wore black breeches and high boots; his cap also, with a
broad band of silver, was encircled with crape, and on the winkers of
his horse were the arms of Gerolstein.

He walked his horse, his advance becoming every moment more difficult,
and he was almost obliged to stop when he found himself in the midst of
the sea of people we have described. Although he called to them, and
moved his horse with the greatest caution, cries, abuse, and threats
were soon directed against him.

"Does he want to ride us down, that vagabond?"

"He's got lots o' silver on his precious body!" cried Tortillard.

"If he comes against us we'll make him alight and strip the 'tin' off
his jacket to go to the melter's," said Nicholas.

"And we'll take the seams out of your carcase if you are not careful,
you cursed jockey!" added the Skeleton, addressing the courier and
seizing the bridle of his horse,--for the crowd was so dense that the
ruffian had given up his idea of dancing to the barrier.

The courier, who was a powerful and resolute fellow, said to the
Skeleton, lifting the handle of his whip, "If you do not let go my
bridle I'll lay my whip over you. Let me pass; my lord's carriage is
coming close behind. Let me go forward, I say."

"Your lord!" said the Skeleton; "what is your lord to me? I'll slit his
weasand if I like! I never did for a lord; I should like to try my
hand."

"There are no more lords now. _Vive la Charte!_" shouted Tortillard; and
as he said so he whistled a verse of the "Parisienne," and clinging to
one of the courier's legs nearly drew him out of his saddle. A blow with
the handle of his whip on Tortillard's head punished his insolence; but
the populace instantly attacked the courier, who in vain spurred his
horse,--he could not advance a step.

Dismounted, amidst the shouts of the mob, he would have been murdered
but for the arrival of Rodolph's carriage, which took off the attention
of these wretches.

The prince's travelling carriage, drawn by four horses, had for some
time past advanced at only a foot pace, and one of the two footmen had
got down from the rumble and was walking by the side of the door, which
was very low; the postilions kept crying out to the people, and went
forward very cautiously.

Rodolph was dressed in deep mourning, as was also his daughter, one of
whose hands he held in his own, looking at her with affection. The
gentle and lovely face of Fleur-de-Marie was enclosed in a small capot
of black crape, which heightened the dazzling brilliancy of her skin and
the beautiful hue of her lovely brown hair; and the azure of this bright
day was reflected in her large eyes, which had never been of more
transparent and softened blue. Although her features wore a gentle
smile, and expressed calmness and happiness when she looked at her
father, yet a tinge of melancholy, and sometimes of undefinable sadness,
threw its shadow over her countenance when her eyes were not fixed on
her father.

At this moment the carriage came amongst the crowd and began to slacken
its pace. Rodolph lowered the window, and said in German to the lackey
who was walking by the window, "Well, Frantz, what is the meaning of
this?"

"Monseigneur, there is such a crowd that the horses cannot move."

"What has this assemblage collected for?"

"Monseigneur, there is an execution going on."

"Ah, frightful!" said Rodolph, throwing himself back in his carriage.

"What is it, my dear father?" asked Fleur-de-Marie with uneasiness.

"Nothing--nothing, dearest."

"Only listen,--these threatening cries approach us! What can it be?"

"Desire them to reach Charenton by another road," said Rodolph.

"Monseigneur, it is too late, the crowd has stopped the horses."

The footman could say no more. The mob, excited by the savage
encouragement of the Skeleton and Nicholas, suddenly surrounded the
carriage, and, in spite of the threats of the postilions, stopped the
horses, and Rodolph saw on all sides threatening, furious countenances,
and above them all the Skeleton, who came to the door of the carriage.

"Take care, my dear father!" exclaimed Fleur-de-Marie, throwing her arms
around Rodolph's neck.

"Oh, you are the 'my lord,' are you?" said the Skeleton, thrusting his
hideous head into the carriage.

Had it not been for his daughter's presence, Rodolph would have given
way to the natural impetuosity of his character at this insolence; but
he controlled himself, and coolly replied:

"What do you want, and why do you stop my carriage?"

"Because we choose," said the Skeleton. "Each in his turn. Yesterday you
trampled on the mob, and to-day the mob will crush you if you stir."

"Father, we are lost!" murmured Fleur-de-Marie.

"Take courage, love! I understand," replied the prince; "it is the last
day of the carnival,--these fellows are tipsy; I will get rid of them."

"I say, my 'covey,' come, get out, and your 'mot' with you!" cried
Nicholas; "why should you trample upon a parcel of poor people!"

"You seem to have drunk a good deal, and to desire to drink more," said
Rodolph; "here, take this, and do not delay my carriage any longer," and
he threw out his purse, which Tortillard caught.

"Oh, what, you are going to travel, eh? Well, then, you've got your
pockets well lined, no doubt. Come, shell out, my blade, or I'll have
your life." And he opened the door suddenly.

Rodolph's patience was exhausted. Alarmed for Fleur-de-Marie, whose
alarm increased every moment, and believing that a display of vigour
would daunt the wretch, whom he believed to be only drunk, he sprung
from the carriage, intending to seize the Skeleton by the throat. The
latter suddenly receded, and then, drawing a long knife-dirk from his
pocket, rushed at Rodolph. Fleur-de-Marie, seeing the dirk raised to
stab her father, gave a shriek, sprung from the carriage, and threw her
arms around him.

Her father's life must have been sacrificed but for the Chourineur, who
at the commencement of this tumult, having recognised the livery of the
prince, had contrived, by superhuman efforts, to reach the Skeleton; and
at the moment when that ruffian menaced the prince with his knife the
Chourineur seized on his arm with one hand, and, with the other grasping
his collar, threw him backwards.

Although surprised, and from behind too, the Skeleton turned around,
and, recognising the Chourineur, cried, "What! the man in the gray
blouse from La Force? This time, then, I'll do for you!" and rushing
furiously at the Chourineur, he plunged his knife in his breast. The
Chourineur staggered, but did not fall. The crowd kept him on his legs.

"The guard! Here come the guard!" exclaimed several voices in alarm.

At these words, and at the sight of the murder of the Chourineur, all
this dense crowd, fearing to be compromised in the assassination,
dispersed as if by magic, and fled in every direction; the Skeleton,
Nicholas, Martial, and Tortillard amongst the earliest.

When the guard came up, guided by the courier (who had escaped when the
crowd had let him go to surround the prince's carriage), there only
remained in this sad scene, Rodolph, his daughter, and the Chourineur,
bathed in his blood. The two servants of the prince had seated him on
the ground, with his back to a tree.

All this passed more quickly than it can be described, and at a few
paces from the _guinguette_ from which the Skeleton and his band had
issued.

The prince, pale and agitated, held in his arms Fleur-de-Marie, half
fainting, whilst the postilions were repairing the harness broken in the
scuffle.

"Quick!" said the prince to his servants engaged in aiding the
Chourineur, "convey this poor fellow to the cabaret; and you," he added,
turning to the courier, "get on the box, and gallop back for Doctor
David at the hôtel; you will find him there, as he does not leave until
eleven o'clock."

The carriage went away at a great speed, and the two servants conveyed
the Chourineur to the low apartment in which the orgies had taken place;
several of the women were still there.

"My poor, dear child!" said Rodolph, to his daughter, "let me take you
to some room in this place where you can await me, for I cannot abandon
this brave fellow, who has again saved my life."

"Oh, my dearest father, I entreat you do not leave me!" exclaimed
Fleur-de-Marie, with alarm, and seizing Rodolph's arm. "Do not leave me
alone! I should die with fright! Where you go I will go!"

"But this frightful spectacle?"

"Yes, thanks to this worthy man, you still live for me, my father, and
therefore allow me to join you in thanking and consoling him."

The prince's perplexity was very great. His daughter evinced so much
just fear of remaining alone in a room in this low haunt that he made up
his mind to allow her to enter with him into the apartment, where they
found the Chourineur.

The mistress of the tavern and many of the women who had remained (and
amongst whom was the ogress of the _tapis-franc_) had hastily laid the
wounded man on a mattress, and then stanched and bound his wound with
napkins. The Chourineur opened his eyes as Rodolph entered. At the sight
of the prince his features, pale with approaching death, became
animated. He smiled painfully, and said in a low voice:

"Ah, M. Rodolph, it was very fortunate I was there!"

"Brave and devoted as ever!" said the prince, in an accent of despair.
"Again you have saved my life!"

"I was going to the barrier of--Charenton--to try and see you go by--see
you for the last time. Fortunately--I was unable to get in for the
crowd--besides--it was--to happen--I told Martial so--I had a
presentiment."

"A presentiment?"

"Yes, M. Rodolph--the dream--of the sergeant--last night."

"Oh, try and forget such ideas! Let us hope the wound is not mortal."

"Oh, yes, the Skeleton struck home! Never mind--I told Martial that a
worm of the earth like me--might sometimes be useful--to a great
lord--like you."

"But my life--I owe my life again to you!"

"We are quits, M. Rodolph. You told me--that I had--heart and honour.
That word, you see--oh, I am choking! Sir, without--my asking--do me the
honour--to give me your hand--I feel I am sinking."

"No, no! Impossible!" exclaimed the prince, bending towards the
Chourineur, and clasping in his hands the icy hand of the dying man,
"no--you will live--you will live!"

"M. Rodolph, there is something, you see, above--I killed--with a blow
of a knife--I die from the blow of a knife!" said the Chourineur, who
was sinking fast.

At this moment his eyes turned towards Fleur-de-Marie, whom he had not
before perceived. Amazement was depicted on his dying features; he made
a movement, and said:

"Ah!--the Goualeuse!"

"Yes, my daughter, who blesses you for having preserved her father!"

"She--your daughter--here? That reminds me of how our acquaintance
began--M. Rodolph--and the blows--with the fist; but this blow with a
knife will be the last--last blow. I slashed--and in my turn am
slashed--stabbed. It is just." He heaved a deep sigh--his head fell
back--he was dead.

The sound of horses without was heard; Rodolph's carriage had met that
of Murphy and David, who, in their desire to rejoin the prince, had
anticipated the hour fixed for their departure.

"David," said Rodolph, wiping his eyes, and pointing to the Chourineur,
"is there no hope?"

"None, monseigneur," replied the doctor, after a moment's examination.

During this moment there passed a mute and terrible scene between
Fleur-de-Marie and the ogress, whom Rodolph had not observed. When the
Chourineur had uttered the name of La Goualeuse, the ogress had raised
her head and looked at Fleur-de-Marie. The horrid hag had already
recognised Rodolph; he was called monseigneur--he called La Goualeuse
his daughter. Such a metamorphosis astounded the ogress, who obstinately
fixed her stupid, wondering eyes on her former victim.

Fleur-de-Marie, pale and overcome, seemed fascinated by her gaze. The
death of the Chourineur, the unexpected appearance of the ogress, which
came to awaken more painfully than ever the remembrance of her former
degradation, appeared to her a sinister presage. From this moment,
Fleur-de-Marie was struck with one of those presentiments which, in
dispositions like hers, have most frequently an irresistible influence.

       *       *       *       *       *

A few days after these events and Rodolph and his daughter quitted Paris
for ever.




EPILOGUE.




CHAPTER I.

GEROLSTEIN.


    _Prince Henry of Herkaüsen-Oldenzaal to the Count Maximilian
    Kaminetz._

                                 OLDENZAAL, 25th August, 1840.

    I am just arrived from Gerolstein, where I have passed three
    months with the grand duke and his family. I expected to find a
    letter announcing your arrival at Oldenzaal, my dear Maximilian.
    Judge of my surprise--of my regret, on hearing that you will be
    detained in Hungary for several weeks.

    For more than four months I have been unable to write to you,
    not knowing where to direct my letters, thanks to your original
    and adventurous manner of travelling. You had, however, formally
    promised me at Vienna that you would be at Oldenzaal the first
    of August; I must then give up the pleasure of seeing you, and
    yet I have never had greater need of pouring forth my sorrows to
    you, Maximilian, my oldest friend, for although we are both of
    us still very young, our friendship is of long standing, as it
    dates from our childhood.

    What shall I say to you? During the last three months a complete
    revolution has taken place in me. I am at one of those moments
    that decide the existence of a man. Judge, then, how necessary
    your presence and your advice are to me. But you will not long
    be wanting, whatever motives you have for remaining in Hungary.
    Come! Come! I entreat of you, Maximilian, for I stand in need of
    you to console me, and I cannot go to seek you. My father, whose
    health is daily declining, has summoned me from Gerolstein. Each
    day makes so great an alteration in him that it is impossible
    for me to leave him.

    I have so much to say that I shall become tedious, but I must
    relate to you the most important--the most romantic incident of
    my life. Why were you not there, my friend? Why were you not
    there? For three months my heart has been a prey to emotions
    equally sweet and sorrowful, and I was alone--I was alone.
    Sympathise with me, you who know the sensibility of my heart,
    you who have seen my eyes filled with tears at the simple
    recital of a noble or generous action, at the simple sight of a
    splendid sunset--of the sky studded with bright stars.

    Do you recollect last year, on our excursion to the ruins of
    Oppenfeld, on the shore of the vast lake, our reveries during
    that evening, so full of calm, of poesy, and of peace? Strange
    contrast! It was three days before that bloody duel, in which I
    would not accept you for my second, for I should have suffered
    too much for you had I been wounded before your eyes,--the duel
    in which, for a dispute at play, my second unhappily killed the
    young Frenchman, the Comte de Saint-Remy.

    Apropos, do you know what has become of the dangerous siren whom
    M. de Saint-Remy brought with him to Oppenfeld, and whose name
    was, I think, Cecily David?

    You will doubtless, my friend, smile with pity at seeing me thus
    losing myself amongst idle recollections of the past, instead of
    coming at once to the grave disclosures that I have announced my
    intention of making; but, in spite of myself, I delay the time
    from moment to moment. I know how severe you are, and I am
    fearful of being blamed. Yes, blamed; because, instead of acting
    with reflection and prudence (prudence of one and twenty,
    alas!), I have acted foolishly, or, rather, I have not acted at
    all as--I have suffered myself to be carried away by the stream
    that urged me on, and it is only since my return from Gerolstein
    that I have been awakened from the enchanting vision that has
    lulled me to sleep for the last three months, and this awaking
    has been a sorrowful one.

    Now, my friend, my dear Maximilian, I take courage. Hear me
    indulgently; I begin with fear and trembling--I dare not look at
    you, for when you read these lines, how grave and stern will
    your face become, stoic that you are!

    After having obtained leave of absence for six months, I left
    Vienna, and remained some time with my father. His health was
    then good, and he advised me to visit my aunt, the Princess
    Juliana, superior of the abbey of Gerolstein. I think I have
    already told you that my grandfather was cousin-german to the
    present duke's grandfather, and the Duke Gustavus Rodolph,
    thanks to this relationship, had always treated my father and
    myself as his cousins.

    You also know, I think, that during a long stay the prince made
    recently in France my father was left at the head of the affairs
    of the duchy. It is not any feeling of ostentatious pride, as
    you well know, Maximilian, that makes me recapitulate all these
    circumstances, but to explain to you the causes of the extreme
    intimacy that existed between the grand duke and myself during
    my stay at Gerolstein.

    Do you recollect that last year, after our voyage on the banks
    of the Rhine, we heard that the prince had found and married,
    _in extremis_, the Countess Macgregor, in order to legitimise
    the daughter he had had by her by a previous and secret
    marriage, afterwards annulled, because it had been contracted
    against the consent of the late grand duke?

    This young girl, thus formally recognised, this charming
    Princess Amelie, of whom Lord Dudley, who had seen her at
    Gerolstein about a year ago, spoke to us with an enthusiasm that
    we suspected of exaggeration, strange chance! who would have
    said then--

    But although you have doubtless penetrated my secret, let me
    pursue the progress of events.

    The convent of Ste. Hermangeld, of which my aunt is abbess, is
    scarcely a quarter of a league from Gerolstein, for the gardens
    of the abbey touch the outskirts of the town. A charming house,
    perfectly isolated from the cloisters, had been placed at my
    disposal by my aunt, who has, as you know, the affection of a
    mother for me. The day of my arrival she informed me a grand
    drawing-room would be held the next day, as the grand duke was
    going formally to announce his intended marriage with La
    Marquise d'Harville, who had just arrived at Gerolstein with her
    father, the Comte d'Orbigny.

    The duke was blamed by some for not having sought an alliance
    with some royal house, but others, and amongst them my aunt,
    congratulated him on having chosen, instead of a marriage of
    ambition, a young and lovely woman to whom he was deeply
    attached, and who belonged to one of the first families in
    France. You know, too, that my aunt has always had the greatest
    regard for the grand duke, and has always appreciated his fine
    qualities.

    "My dear child," said she to me, speaking of the drawing-room,
    to which I was going the next day,--"my dear child, the most
    astonishing sight you will see to-morrow will be the pearl of
    Gerolstein."

    "Of whom are you talking, my dear aunt?"

    "Of the Princess Amelie."

    "The grand duke's daughter? Lord Dudley spoke of her at Vienna
    with warmth we suspected of exaggeration."

    "At my age and in my position," replied my aunt, "people do not
    exaggerate, so you can trust to my judgment, and I assure you I
    never knew any one more enchanting than the Princess Amelie. I
    would speak of her beauty were it not for an indefinable charm
    she possesses, superior even to her beauty. From the first day
    that the grand duke presented me to her, I felt myself
    irresistibly drawn towards her; and I am not the only person.
    The Archduchess Sophia is at Gerolstein, and is the most proud
    and haughty princess I know."

    "Very true, aunt; her irony is terrible, very few persons escape
    from her sarcasms; at Vienna every one dreaded her. Can the
    Princess Amelie have found favour in her eyes?"

    "The other day she came here after visiting the asylum placed
    under the princess's direction. 'Do you know,' said this
    redoubtable archduchess to me, 'that if I resided long with the
    grand duke's daughter I should become quite harmless, so
    contagious is her goodness!'"

    "Why, my cousin must be an enchantress!" said I, laughing, to my
    aunt.

    "Her most powerful charm, at least in my eyes," replied my aunt,
    "is the mixture of sweetness, modesty, and dignity that I have
    told you of, and which gives a most touching expression to her
    face."

    "Indeed, aunt, modesty is a rare quality in a princess so young,
    so beautiful, and so happy."

    "Reflect that the princess is still more deserving of praise for
    her modesty, as her elevation is so very recent."

    "In her interview with you, aunt, did the princess make any
    reference to her early life?"

    "No; but when, notwithstanding my advanced age, I addressed her
    with the respect due to her rank, since her royal highness is
    the grand duke's daughter, her ingenuous confusion, mingled with
    gratitude and veneration for me, quite overpowered me; for her
    reserve, full of dignity and affability, proved to me that her
    present elevation did not make her forget her past life, and
    that she accorded to my age what I accorded to her rank."

    "It must require," said I, "the most perfect tact to observe
    those nice differences."

    "My dear boy, the more I see of the princess, the more I
    congratulate myself on my first impression. Since she has been
    here the number of charitable acts she has done is incredible,
    and that with a reflection and a judgment that in a person of
    her age quite surprises me. Judge yourself. At her request the
    grand duke has founded at Gerolstein an establishment for
    orphans of five or six years, and for young girls (who are
    either orphans or abandoned by their parents) of the age of
    sixteen, that age so fatal to those who are not protected
    against the temptations of vice or the pressure of want.

    "The good sisters of my convent teach and direct the children of
    this asylum. During my visits there I have had ample
    opportunities of judging of the adoration that these poor,
    unfortunate creatures have for the princess. Every day she
    spends several hours at this place, which is placed under her
    protection, and I repeat that it is not merely gratitude and
    respect that the children and nuns feel towards the princess, it
    almost amounts to fanaticism."

    "The princess must be an angel," said I to my aunt.

    "An angel, indeed!" replied she, "for you cannot conceive with
    what touching kindness she treats her young protégées. I have
    never seen the susceptibility of misfortune meet with more
    delicate sympathy. You would think some irresistible attraction
    drew the princess towards this class of unfortunates. Will you
    believe it? she, the daughter of a sovereign, only addresses
    these poor children as 'my sisters!'"

    At these last words of my aunt I confess I felt my eyes fill
    with tears. Do you not also admire the admirable and pious
    conduct of this young princess?

    "Since the princess," said I, "is so marvellously gifted, I
    shall be greatly embarrassed when I am presented to her
    to-morrow. You know how timid I am; you know, also, that
    elevation of character imposes upon me more than high birth, so
    that I am certain to appear both stupid and embarrassed
    to-morrow; so I make up my mind to that beforehand."

    "Come, come!" said my aunt, smiling, "she will take pity upon
    you, the more readily as you are not quite a stranger to her."

    "I am not a stranger to her, aunt?"

    "Certainly not."

    "How so?"

    "You recollect that when at the age of sixteen you left
    Oldenzaal, to travel with your father through Russia and
    England, I had your portrait painted in the costume you wore at
    the first _bal costumé_ the late duchess gave?"

    "Yes, aunt, the costume of a German page of the sixteenth
    century."

    "Our famous painter, Fritz Mocker, whilst he painted a faithful
    likeness of you, not only produced a page of that century, but
    even the style of the pictures of that time.

    "Some days after her arrival at Gerolstein, the Princess Amelie,
    who had come with her father to visit me, remarked your
    portrait, and asked what was that charming picture of olden
    times. Her father smiled, and said, 'This is the portrait of a
    cousin of ours, who would be, were he now alive (as you see by
    his dress), some three hundred years old, but who, although very
    young, made himself remarkable for his courage and goodness of
    heart; has he not bravery in his eyes and goodness in his
    smile?'"

    Do not, I entreat you, Maximilian, shrug your shoulders with
    disdain at seeing me write these puerile details of myself,
    which are, alas, necessary to my story.

    "The Princess Amelie," continued my aunt, "deceived by this
    innocent pleasantry, after a long examination of your portrait,
    joined with her father in praising the amiable and determined
    expression of your face. Some time after, when I went to
    Gerolstein, she questioned me playfully about 'her cousin of the
    olden time.'

    "I then explained the trick to her, and told her that the
    handsome page of the sixteenth century was really the Prince
    Henry d'Herkaüsen-Oldenzaal, a young man of one and twenty,
    captain in the guards of his majesty the Emperor of Austria, and
    in every other respect than the costume very like his picture.
    At these words the princess," continued my aunt, "blushed and
    became serious, and has never since spoken of the picture.
    However, you see that you are not quite a stranger to your
    cousin; so take courage, and maintain the reputation of your
    portrait."

    This conversation took place, as I have already told you, the
    evening previous to the day on which I was to be presented to
    the princess my cousin. I left my aunt, and returned to my own
    apartments.

    You have often told me, my dear Maximilian, that I was totally
    free from vanity; I must therefore trust to that to prevent my
    appearing vain during this recital.

    As soon as I was alone I reflected with a secret satisfaction
    that the Princess Amelie, after seeing my portrait, painted five
    or six years ago, had inquired after "her cousin of the olden
    time."

    Nothing could be more absurd than to build the slightest hope on
    so trivial a circumstance, I acknowledge; but I always treat you
    with the most perfect confidence, and I acknowledge that this
    trifling circumstance delighted me.

    No doubt the praise I had just heard bestowed on the princess by
    so grave and austere a person as my aunt, by raising her in my
    estimation, rendered this circumstance more agreeable.

    Why should I tell you? The hopes I conceived from this trifling
    event were so mad that, now that I look back more calmly on the
    past, I ask myself how I could have indulged in ideas that must
    have ended in my destruction.

    Although related to the grand duke, and always treated by him
    with the greatest kindness, yet it was impossible to entertain
    the slightest hope of a marriage with the princess; even had she
    returned my affection it would still have been impossible. Our
    family holds an honourable position, but it is poor when
    compared with the grand duke, the richest prince of the German
    confederation; and besides, I was only one and twenty, a simple
    captain in the guards, without any reputation or any position.
    Never could the grand duke think of me as a suitor for his
    daughter.

    All these reflections ought to have saved me from a passion I
    did not as yet feel, but of which I had a strange presentiment.

    Alas! I rather gave way to fresh puerilities; I wore on my
    finger a ring that Thecla (the countess of whom I have so often
    spoken) had given me, although this souvenir of a boyish love
    could not have much embarrassed me. I sacrificed it to my new
    flame, and, opening the window, I cast the ring into the waves
    of the river that flowed beneath.

    I have no need to tell you what a night I passed, you can
    imagine; I knew the princess was very beautiful; I sought to
    picture to myself her features, her air, her manner, her figure,
    the sound of her voice; and thinking of my portrait which she
    had noticed I recollected that the artist had flattered me
    excessively, and I contrasted the picturesque dress of a page of
    the sixteenth century with the simple uniform of a captain of
    the Austrian guards.

    But amidst all these absurd ideas some generous thoughts crossed
    my mind, and I was overcome,--yes, overcome by the recollection
    of the tenderness of the princess for those poor girls whom she
    always terms "my sisters."

    The next day the hour for the reception came. I tried on several
    uniforms one after another, found them all to fit me very ill,
    and departed very dissatisfied with myself.

    Although Gerolstein is only a quarter of a league from Ste.
    Hermangeld, during the short journey all the childish ideas that
    had so occupied me during the night had given place to one sad
    and grave thought.

    An invincible presentiment told me I was approaching one of the
    crises of my life. A magical inspiration revealed to me that I
    was about to love, to love as a man loves but once in his life;
    and, as if to complete my misfortunes, this love, as loftily as
    deservedly bestowed, was doomed to be unhappy.

    You do not know the grand ducal palace of Gerolstein. In the
    opinion of every one who has visited the capitals of Europe,
    there is, with the exception of Versailles, no royal residence
    that has a more regal and imposing appearance.

    If at this time I speak of this, it is because, thinking over
    them, I wonder how they did not recall me to myself; for the
    Princess Amelie was the daughter of the sovereign of this
    palace, these guards, and of these riches.

    You arrived at the palace by the marble court; so called,
    because, with the exception of a drive for the carriages, it is
    paved with variegated marble, forming the most magnificent
    mosaics, in the centre of which is a basin of breccia antique,
    into which a stream of water flows from a porphyry vase.

    This court of honour is surrounded by a row of beautiful marble
    statues, holding candelabras of gilt bronze, from which sprung
    brilliant jets of gas. Alternately with these statues are the
    Medicean vases, raised on richly sculptured pedestals, and
    filled with rose laurels, whose leaves shine in the lights with
    a metallic lustre.

    The carriages stopped at the foot of the double staircase
    leading to the peristyle of the palace. At the foot of this
    staircase were stationed on guard, mounted on their black
    horses, two soldiers of the regiment of the guards of the grand
    duke. You would have been struck with the stern and warlike
    appearance of these two giants, whose cuirasses and helmets,
    made like those of the ancients, without crest or plume,
    sparkled in the sun.

    These soldiers wore blue coats with yellow collars, buckskin
    breeches, and jack-boots. To please you who are so fond of
    military details, I add, that at the top landing of the
    staircase were stationed, as sentinels, two grenadiers of the
    foot-guards of the duke. Their uniform, with the exception of
    the colour of the coat and facings, resembles, I am told, that
    of Napoleon's grenadiers.

    After traversing the vestibule, where the porters of the duke
    were stationed, halberd in hand, I ascended a splendid staircase
    of white marble, which opened upon a portico, ornamented with
    jasper columns, and surmounted by a painted and gilt cupola.
    There were two long files of domestics.

    I then entered the guard-room, at the door of which I found a
    chamberlain and an aide-de-camp, whose duty it was to present to
    his royal highness those persons who were entitled to this
    honour. My relationship, though distant, procured me a special
    presentation. An aide-de-camp preceded me into a long gallery,
    filled with gentlemen in full court dress or uniform, and
    splendidly attired ladies.

    Whilst I passed through this brilliant assembly, I heard here
    and there remarks that augmented my embarrassment. Every one
    admired the angelic beauty of the Princess Amelie, the charming
    appearance of the Marquise d'Harville, and the imperial air of
    the Archduchess Sophia, who, recently arrived from Munich with
    the Archduke Stanislaus, was about to depart for Warsaw; but
    whilst rendering their just tribute of admiration to the lofty
    bearing of the duchess and to the charms of the Marquise
    d'Harville, every one agreed that nothing could exceed the
    loveliness of the Princess Amelie.

    As I approached the spot where the grand duke and the princess
    were I felt my heart beat more and more violently. At the moment
    that I entered the salon (I forgot to tell you there was a
    concert and ball at court) the famous Liszt sat down to the
    piano, and instantly the most profound silence succeeded to the
    conversation that was going on. I waited in the embrasure of a
    door until Liszt had finished the piece he was playing with his
    accustomed taste.

    It was then that I saw the Princess Amelie for the first time.

    I must tell you all that passed, for I feel an indescribable
    pleasure in writing it.

    Picture to yourself a large salon furnished with regal
    splendour, brilliantly lighted up, and hung with crimson silk,
    embroidered with wreaths of flowers in gold. In the first row,
    on large gilt chairs, sat the Archduchess Sophia with Madame
    d'Harville on her left, and the Princess Amelie on her right.
    Behind them stood the duke in the uniform of colonel of the
    guards. He seemed scarcely thirty, and the military uniform set
    off his fine figure and noble features. Beside him was the
    Archduke Stanislaus in the uniform of a field-marshal; then came
    the princess's maids of honour, the ladies of the grand
    dignitaries of the court, and then the dignitaries themselves.

    I need scarcely tell you that the Princess Amelie was less
    conspicuous by her rank than by her extraordinary beauty. Do not
    condemn me without reading this description of her. Although it
    falls far short of the reality, you will understand my
    adoration. You will understand that as soon as I saw her I loved
    her; and that the suddenness of my passion can only be equalled
    by its violence and its eternity.

    The Princess Amelie was dressed in a plain white watered silk
    dress, and wore, like the archduchess, the riband of the
    imperial order of St. Nepomucenus recently sent to her by the
    empress. A diadem of pearls surrounded her head, and harmonised
    admirably with two splendid braids of fair hair that shaded her
    delicate cheeks. Her arms, whiter than the lace that ornamented
    them, were half hidden in long gloves, reaching nearly to her
    elbow.

    Nothing could be more perfect than her figure, nothing more
    charming than her foot in its satin slipper. At the moment when
    I saw her her beaming blue eyes wore a pensive expression. I do
    not know whether some serious thought came over her, or whether
    she was impressed with the grave melody of the piece Liszt was
    playing; but the expression of her countenance seemed to me full
    of sweetness and melancholy.

    Never can I express my feelings at that moment. All that my aunt
    had related of her goodness crossed my mind.

    Smile if you will, but my eyes became full of tears when I saw
    this young girl, so beautiful and so idolised by such a father,
    seem so melancholy and pensive.

    You know how scrupulously etiquette and the privileges of rank
    are observed by us. Thanks to my title and my relationship to
    the grand duke, the crowd in the midst of which I stood
    gradually fell back, and I found myself left almost alone in the
    embrasure of the door. It was, no doubt, owing to this
    circumstance that the princess, awaking from her reverie,
    perceived, and no doubt recognised me, for she started and
    blushed.

    She had seen my portrait at my aunt's, and recognised me;
    nothing could be more simple. The princess's eyes did not rest
    upon me an instant, but that look threw me into the most violent
    confusion. I felt my cheeks glow, I cast down my eyes, and did
    not venture to raise them for some time. When I dared at last to
    steal a glance at the princess she was speaking in a low tone to
    the archduchess, who seemed to listen to her with the most
    affectionate interest.

    Liszt having paused for a few moments between the pieces he was
    playing, the grand duke took the opportunity of expressing his
    admiration. On returning to his place he perceived me, nodded
    kindly to me, and said something to the archduchess, fixing his
    eyes on me at the same time. The duchess, after looking at me a
    moment, turned to the duke, who smiled and said something to his
    daughter that seemed to embarrass her, for she blushed again. I
    was on thorns; but, unfortunately, etiquette forbade my leaving
    my place until the concert was over.

    As soon as the concert was finished I followed the aide-de-camp;
    he conducted me to the grand duke, who deigned to advance a few
    steps towards me, took me by the arm, and said to the
    Archduchess Sophia:

    "Permit me to present to your royal highness my cousin, Prince
    Henry of Herkaüsen-Oldenzaal."

    "I have seen the prince at Vienna, and meet him here with
    pleasure," replied the duchess, before whom I inclined myself
    respectfully.

    "My dear Amelie," continued the prince, addressing his daughter,
    "this is Prince Henry, your cousin, the son of one of my most
    valued friends, Prince Paul, whom I greatly lament not seeing
    here to-day."

    "Pray, monseigneur, inform the prince that I equally regret his
    absence, for I am always delighted to know any of my father's
    friends."

    I had not until then heard the princess's voice, and I was
    struck with its intense sweetness.

    "I hope, my dear Henry, you will stay some time with your aunt,"
    said the grand duke. "Come and see us often about three o'clock
    _en famille_; and if we ride out you must accompany us. You know
    how great an affection I have always felt for you, for your
    noble qualities."

    "I cannot express my gratitude for your royal highness's
    kindness."

    "Well, to prove it," said the grand duke, smiling, "engage your
    cousin for the second quadrille; the first belongs to the
    archduke."

    "Will your royal highness do me the honour?" said I to my
    cousin.

    "Oh, call each other cousin, as in the good old times," replied
    the duke, laughing. "There should be no ceremony between
    relations."

    "Will you dance with me, cousin?"

    "Yes, cousin," replied the princess.

    I cannot tell how much I felt the touching kindness of the grand
    duke, and how bitterly I reproached myself for yielding to an
    affection the prince would never authorise.

    I vowed inwardly that nothing should induce me to acquaint my
    cousin with my affection, but I feared my emotion would betray
    me.

    I had leisure for these reflections whilst my cousin danced the
    first quadrille with the Archduke Stanislaus. Nothing was more
    suited to display the graces of the princess's person than the
    slow movements of the dance. I anxiously awaited my turn; and I
    succeeded in concealing my emotion when I led her to the
    quadrille.

    "Does your royal highness sanction my calling you cousin?" said
    I.

    "Oh, yes, cousin, I am always delighted to obey my father."

    "I rejoice in this familiarity, since I have learnt from my aunt
    to know you."

    "My father has often spoken of you, cousin; and what may,
    perhaps, astonish you," added she, timidly, "I also knew you by
    sight; for one day the Abbess of Ste. Hermangeld, your aunt, for
    whom I have the greatest respect, showed me your picture."

    "As a page of the sixteenth century?"

    "Yes, cousin; and my father was malicious enough to tell me that
    it was an ancestor of ours, and spoke so highly of his courage
    and his other qualities that our family ought to be proud of
    their descent from him."

    "Alas, cousin, I fear my resemblance to my portrait is not
    great!"

    "You are mistaken, cousin," said the princess. "For at the end
    of the concert I recognised you immediately, in spite of the
    difference of costume." Then, wishing to change the
    conversation, she added, "How charmingly M. Liszt plays!--does
    he not?"

    "Yes. How attentively you listened to him!"

    "Because there is to me a double charm in music without words.
    Not only you hear the execution, but you can adapt your thoughts
    to the melody. Do you understand me?"

    "Perfectly; your own thoughts become words to the air."

    "Yes, you quite comprehend me," said she, with a gesture of
    satisfaction. "I feared I could not express what I felt just
    now."

    "I thank God, cousin," said I, smiling, "you can have no words
    to set to so sad an air."

    I know not whether my question was indiscreet or whether she had
    not heard me, but suddenly she exclaimed, pointing out to me the
    grand duke, who crossed the room with the archduchess on his
    arm, "Cousin, look at my father, how handsome he is! how noble!
    how good! Every one looks at him as if they loved him more than
    they feared him."

    "Ah," cried I, "it is not only here he is beloved. If the
    blessing of his people be transmitted to their posterity, the
    name of Rodolph of Gerolstein will be immortal."

    "To speak thus is to be, indeed, worthy of his attachment."

    "I do but give utterance to the feelings of all present; see how
    they all hasten to pay their respects to Madame d'Harville!"

    "No one in the world is more worthy of my father's affections
    than Madame d'Harville."

    "You are more capable than any one of appreciating her, as you
    have been in France."

    Scarcely had I pronounced these words than the princess cast
    down her eyes, and her features assumed an air of melancholy;
    and when I led her back to her seat the expression of them was
    still the same. I suppose that my allusion to her stay in France
    recalled the death of her mother.

    In the course of the evening a circumstance occurred which you
    may think too trivial to mention, perhaps, but which evinces the
    extraordinary influence this young girl universally inspires.
    Her bandeau of pearls having become disarranged, the Archduchess
    Sophia, who was leaning on her arm, kindly readjusted the
    ornament upon her brow. Knowing, as we do, the hauteur of the
    archduchess, such condescension is almost inconceivable.

    The next morning I was invited, together with a few other
    persons, to be present at the marriage of the grand duke with
    Madame la Marquise d'Harville. I had never seen the princess so
    radiant and happy.

    Some days after the duke's marriage I had a long interview with
    him. He questioned me about my past life, my future career. He
    gave me the most admirable advice, the kindest encouragement. So
    much so that the idea crossed my mind that he had perceived my
    love and wished to bring me to confess it.

    But this idea was soon dispelled. The prince concluded by
    telling me that the great wars were over, that I ought to avail
    myself of my name, my connections, the education I had received,
    and my father's friendship with the Prince de M----, prime
    minister of the emperor, in order to follow a diplomatic instead
    of a military career. In a word, he offered me his sovereign
    protection to facilitate my entry in the career he proposed to
    me.

    I thanked him for his offers with gratitude, and added that I
    felt the weight of his advice and would follow it.

    I at first visited the palace very seldom; but, thanks to the
    duke's reiterated invitations, I was soon there almost every
    day. We lived in the peaceful retirement resembling that of some
    English mansions. When the weather permitted we rode out with
    the duke, the duchess, and the grand personages of the court.

    When we were forced to remain at home we sang, and I accompanied
    the grand duchess and my cousin, who had the sweetest and most
    expressive voice I ever heard. At other times we inspected the
    magnificent picture galleries and museums, and the library of
    the prince, who is one of the most accomplished men in Europe. I
    often dined at the palace, and on the opera nights I accompanied
    the duke's family to the theatre.

    Could this intimacy have lasted for ever I should have been
    happy, perhaps, but I reflected that I should be summoned to
    Vienna by my duties. I reflected, also, that the duke would soon
    think of finding a suitable alliance for his daughter.

    My cousin remarked this change in me. The evening before I
    quitted Gerolstein she told me she had for several days remarked
    my abstracted manner. I endeavoured to evade this question,
    saying that my approaching departure was the cause.

    "I can scarcely believe it," replied she. "My father treats you
    like a son; every one loves you. It would be ingratitude if you
    were unhappy."

    "Alas!" said I, unable to restrain my emotion, "it is grief I am
    a prey to!"

    "Why, what has happened?"

    "Just now, cousin, you have told me your father treated me like
    a son, and that every one loved me; and yet, ere long, I must
    quit Gerolstein. It is this that grieves me."

    "And are the recollections of those you have left as nothing?"

    "Doubtless; but time brings so many changes."

    "There are affections, at least, that are unchangeable; such as
    that of my father for you, such as that I feel for you. When you
    are once brother and sister you never forget each other," added
    she, looking up, her large blue eyes full of tears.

    I was on the point of betraying myself; however, I controlled my
    feelings in time.

    "Do you think then, cousin," said I, "that when I return in a
    few years this affection will continue?"

    "Why should it not?"

    "Because you will be probably married; you will have other
    duties to perform, and you will forget your poor brother."

    This was all that passed; I know not if she was offended at
    these words, or whether she was like myself grieved at the
    changes the future must bring; but, instead of answering me, she
    was silent for a moment, then, rising hastily from her seat, her
    face pale and altered, she left the room, after having looked
    for a few seconds at the embroidery of the young Countess
    d'Oppenheim, one of her maids of honour.

    The same evening I received a second letter from my father,
    urging me to return. The next morning I took leave of the grand
    duke. He told me my cousin was unwell, but that he would make
    my adieux; he then embraced me tenderly, renewed his promises of
    assistance, and added that, whenever I had leave of absence,
    nothing would give him greater pleasure than to see me at
    Gerolstein.

    Happily, on my arrival, I found my father better; still confined
    to his bed, and very weak, it is true, but out of danger. Now
    that you know all, Maximilian, tell me, what can I do?

    Just as I finished this letter, my door opened, and, to my great
    surprise, my father, whom I believed to be in bed, entered; he
    saw the letter on the table.

    "To whom are you writing so long a letter?" said he, smiling.

    "To Maximilian, father."

    "Oh," said he, with an expression of affectionate reproach, "he
    has all your confidence! He is very happy!"

    He pronounced these last words in so sorrowful a tone that I
    held out the letter to him, almost without reflection, saying:

    "Read it, father."

    My friend, he has read all! After having remained musing some
    time he said to me:

    "Henry, I shall write and inform the grand duke of all that
    passed during your stay at Gerolstein."

    "Father, I entreat you not!"

    "Is what you have written to Maximilian scrupulously true?"

    "Yes."

    "Do you love your cousin?"

    "I adore her; but--"

    My father interrupted me.

    "Then, in that case, I shall write to the grand duke and demand
    her hand for you."

    "But, father, such a demand will be madness on my part!"

    "It is true; but still, in making this demand, I shall acquaint
    the prince with my reasons for making it. He has received you
    with the greatest kindness, and it would be unworthy of me to
    deceive him. He will be touched at the frankness of my demand,
    and, though he refuse it, as he certainly will, he will yet know
    that, should you ever again visit Gerolstein, you cannot be on
    the same familiar terms with the princess."

    You know that, although so tenderly attached to me, my father is
    inflexible in whatever concerns his duty; judge, then, of my
    fears, of my anxiety.

    I hastily terminate this long letter, but I will soon write
    again. Sympathise with me, for I fear I shall go mad if the
    fever that preys on me does not soon abate. Adieu, adieu! Ever
    yours,

                                                 HENRY D'H.-O.

We will now conduct the reader to the palace of Gerolstein, inhabited by
Fleur-de-Marie since her return from France.




CHAPTER II.

THE PRINCESS AMELIE.


The apartment of Fleur-de-Marie (we only call her the Princess Amelie
officially) had been by Rodolph's orders splendidly furnished. From the
balcony of the oratory the two towers of the Convent of Ste. Hermangeld
were visible, which, embosomed in the woods, were in their turn
overtopped by a high hill, at the foot of which the abbey was built.

One fine summer's morning Fleur-de-Marie gazed listlessly at this
splendid landscape; her hair was plainly braided, and she wore a high,
white dress with blue stripes; a large muslin collar was fastened around
her throat by a small blue silk handkerchief, of the same hue as her
sash.

Seated in a large armchair of carved ebony, she leant her head on her
small and delicately white hand. Fleur-de-Marie's attitude and the
expression of her face showed that she was a prey to the deepest
melancholy.

At this instant a female of a grave and distinguished appearance entered
the room, and coughed gently to attract Fleur-de-Marie's attention. She
started from her reverie, and, gracefully acknowledging the salutation
of the newcomer, said:

"What is it, my dear countess?"

"I come to inform your royal highness that the grand duke will be here
in a few minutes, and, also, to ask a favour of you."

"Ask it, you know how happy I am to oblige you."

"It concerns an unhappy creature who had unfortunately quitted
Gerolstein before your royal highness had founded the asylum for orphans
and children abandoned by their parents."

"What do you wish I should do for her?"

"The father went to seek his fortune in America, leaving his wife and
daughter to gain a precarious subsistence. The mother died, and this
poor girl, then only sixteen, was seduced and abandoned. She fell lower
and lower, until at length she became, like so many others, the
opprobrium of her sex."

Fleur-de-Marie turned red and shuddered. The countess, fearing she had
wounded the delicacy of the princess by the mention of this girl's
condition, replied:

"I pray your royal highness to pardon me; I have, doubtless, shocked you
by speaking of this wretched creature, but her repentance seemed so
sincere that I ventured to plead for her."

"You were quite right. Pray continue," said Fleur-de-Marie, subduing her
emotion. "Every fault is worthy of pity when followed by repentance."

"After two years passed in this wretched mode of existence she repented
sincerely, and came back to Gerolstein. She chanced to lodge in the
house of a good and pious widow; encouraged by her kindness, the poor
creature told her all her sad story, adding that she bitterly regretted
the faults of her early life, and that all she desired was to enter some
religious house, where by prayer and penitence she might atone for her
sins. She is only eighteen, very beautiful, and possesses a considerable
sum of money, which she wishes to bestow on the convent she enters."

"I undertake to provide for her," said Fleur-de-Marie; "since she
repents, she is worthy of compassion; her remorse must be more bitter in
proportion as it is sincere."

"I hear the grand duke," said the lady in waiting, without remarking
Fleur-de-Marie's agitation; and, as she spoke, Rodolph entered, holding
a large bouquet of roses in his hand.

At the sight of the prince the countess retired, and scarcely had she
left the apartment than Fleur-de-Marie threw herself into her father's
arms, and leant her head on his shoulder.

"Good morning, love," said Rodolph, pressing her to his heart. "See what
beautiful roses; I never saw finer ones." And the prince made a slight
motion as if to disengage himself from her and look at her, when, seeing
her weeping, he threw down the bouquet, and, taking her hands, cried:

"You are weeping! What is the matter?"

"Nothing, dear father," said Fleur-de-Marie, striving to smile.

"My child," replied Rodolph, "you are concealing something from me; tell
me, I entreat you, what thus distresses you. Never mind the bouquet."

"Oh, you know how fond I am of roses; I always was! Do you recollect,"
added she, "my poor little rose-tree? I have preserved the pieces of it
so carefully!"

At this terrible allusion, Rodolph cried:

"Unhappy child! Is it possible that, in the midst of all the splendour
that surrounds you, you think of the past? Alas! I hoped my tenderness
had made you forget it."

"Forgive me, dear father; I did not mean what I said. I grieve you."

"I grieve, my child, because I know how painful it is for you thus to
ponder over the past."

"Dear father, it is the first time since I have been here."

"The first time you have mentioned it, but not the first time you have
thought of it; I have for a long time noticed your sadness, and was
unable to account for it. My position was so delicate, though I never
told you anything, I thought of you constantly. When I contracted my
marriage, I thought it would increase your happiness. I did not venture
to hope you would quite forget the past; but I hoped that, cherished and
supported by the amiable woman whom I had chosen for my wife, you would
look upon the past as amply atoned for by your sufferings. No matter
what faults you had committed, they have been a thousand times expiated
by the good you have done since you have been here."

"Father!"

"Oh, let me tell you all, since a providential chance has brought about
this conversation I at once desired and dreaded! I would, to secure your
happiness, have sacrificed my affection for Madame d'Harville and my
friendship for Murphy, had I thought they recalled the past to you."

"Oh, their presence, when they know what I was, and yet love me so
tenderly, seems a proof of pardon and oblivion to me! I should have been
miserable if for my sake you had renounced Madame d'Harville's hand."

"Oh, you know not what sacrifice Clémence herself would have made, for
she was aware of the full extent of my duties to you!"

"Duties to me! What have I done to deserve so much goodness?"

"Until the moment that Heaven restored you to me, your life had been one
of sorrow and misery, and I reproach myself with your sufferings as if I
had caused them, and when I see you happy, it seems to me I am forgiven.
My only wish, my sole aim, is to render you as happy as you were before
unhappy, to exalt you as you have been abased, for the last trace of
your humiliation must disappear when you see the noblest in the land vie
with each other who shall show you most respect."

"Respect to me! Oh, no! It is to my rank and not to myself they show
respect."

"It is to you, dear child,--it is to you!"

"You love me so much, dear father, that every one thinks to please you
by showing me respect."

"Oh, naughty child!" cried Rodolph, tenderly kissing his daughter; "she
will not cede anything to my paternal pride."

"Is not your pride satisfied at my attributing the kindness I receive to
you only?"

"No, that is not the same thing; I cannot be proud of myself, but of
you. You are ignorant of your own merits; in fifteen months your
education has been so perfected that the most enthusiastic mother would
be proud of you."

At this moment the door of the salon opened, and Clémence, grand duchess
of Gerolstein, entered, holding a letter in her hand.

"Here, love, is a letter from France," said she to Rodolph; "I brought
it myself, because I wished to bid good-morrow to my dear child, whom I
have not yet seen to-day."

"This letter arrives most opportunely," said Rodolph. "We were speaking
of the Past; that monster we must destroy, since he threatens the repose
of our child."

"Is it possible that these fits of melancholy we have so often
remarked--"

"Were occasioned by unhappy recollections; but now that we know the
enemy we shall destroy him."

"From whom is this letter?" asked Clémence.

"From Rigolette, Germain's wife."

"Rigolette?" cried Fleur-de-Marie. "Oh, I am so glad!"

"Do you not fear that this letter may serve to awaken fresh
recollections?" said Clémence, in a low tone to Rodolph.

"On the contrary, I wish to destroy these recollections, and I shall,
doubtless, find arms in this letter, for Rigolette is a worthy creature,
who appreciated and adored our child."

Rodolph then read the following letter aloud:

                             "BOUQUEVAL FARM, August 15, 1841.

      "_Monseigneur_:--I take the liberty of writing to you to
    communicate a great happiness which has occurred to us, and to
    ask of you another favour,--of you, to whom we already owe so
    much, or rather to whom we owe the real paradise in which we
    live, myself, my dear Germain, and his good mother. It is this,
    monseigneur: For the last ten days I have been crazy with joy,
    for ten days ago I was confined with such a love of a little
    girl, which I say is the image of Germain, he says it is exactly
    like me, and our dear mother says it is like us both; the fact
    is, it has beautiful blue eyes like Germain, and black curly
    hair like mine."

"Good, worthy people, they deserve to be happy!" said Rodolph. "If ever
there was a couple well matched it is they."

    "But really, monseigneur, I must ask your pardon for this
    chatter. Your ears must often tingle, monseigneur, for the day
    never passes that we do not talk of you, when we say to each
    other how happy we are, how happy we were, for then your name
    naturally occurs. Excuse this blot, monseigneur; but, without
    thinking of it, I had written Monsieur Rodolph, as I used to say
    formerly, and then I scratched it out. I hope you will find my
    writing improved as well as my spelling, for Germain gives me
    lessons, and I do not make those long ugly scrawls I used to do
    when you mended my pens."

"I must confess," said Rodolph, with a smile, "that my little protégée
makes a mistake, and I am sure Germain is more frequently employed in
kissing the hand of his scholar than in directing it."

"My dear duke, you are unjust," said Clémence, looking at the letter;
"it is rather a very large hand, but very legible."

"Why, yes, she has really improved," observed Rodolph; "it would in
former days have taken eight pages to contain what she now writes in
two." And he continued:

    "It is quite true, you know, monseigneur, that you used to mend
    my pens, and when we think of it, we two Germains, we feel quite
    ashamed when we recollect how free from pride you were. Ah, I am
    again chattering instead of saying what we wish to ask of you,
    monseigneur; for my husband unites with me, and it is very
    important, for we attach a great deal to it, as you will see. We
    entreat of you, monseigneur, to have the goodness to choose for
    us and give us a name for our dear little daughter; this has
    been the wish of the godfather and godmother,--and who do you
    think they are, monseigneur? Two persons whom you and the
    Marquise d'Harville have taken from misery and made very happy,
    as happy as we are. They are Morel, the lapidary, and Jeanne
    Duport, a worthy creature whom I met in prison when I went there
    to visit my dear Germain, and whom the marquise afterwards took
    out of the hospital.

    "And now, monseigneur, you must know why we have chosen M. Morel
    for godfather, and Jeanne Duport for godmother. We said it would
    be one way of again thanking M. Rodolph for all his kindness, to
    have, as godfather and godmother for our little one, worthy
    persons who owe everything to him and the marchioness; whilst,
    at the same time, Morel and Jeanne Duport are the worthiest
    people breathing, they are of our own class in life, and
    besides, as we say with Germain, they are our kinsfolk in
    happiness, for, like us, they are of the family of your
    protégés."

"Really, my dear father, this idea is most delightful and excellent!"
said Fleur-de-Marie; "to take for godfather and godmother persons who
owe everything to you and my dear second mother!"

"Yes, indeed, dearest," said Clémence; "and I am deeply touched at their
remembrance."

"And I am very happy to find that my favours have been so well
bestowed," said Rodolph, continuing his letter.

    "With the money you gave him, Morel has now become a jewel
    broker, and earns enough to bring up his family very
    respectably. Poor Louise, who is a very good girl, is going, I
    believe, to be married to a very worthy young man, who loves and
    respects her as he ought to do, for she has been unfortunate,
    but not guilty, and Louise's husband that is to be is perfectly
    sensible of this."

Rodolph laid great stress on these last words, looked at his daughter
for a moment, and then continued:

    "I must add, monseigneur, that Jeanne Duport, through the
    generosity of the marquise, has been separated from her husband,
    that bad man who beat her and took everything from her; she has
    now her eldest daughter with her: they keep a small trimming
    shop, and are doing very well. Germain writes to you regularly,
    monseigneur, every month, on the subject of the Bank for
    Mechanics out of Work and Gratuitous Loans; there are scarcely
    any sums in arrear, and we find already the good effects of it
    in this quarter. Nine, at least, poor families can support
    themselves in the dead season of work without sending their
    clothes and bedding to the pawnbroker's. And when work comes
    in, it does one's heart good to see the haste with which they
    return the money lent, and they bless you for the loans so
    serviceably advanced.

    "Yes, monseigneur, they bless you; for, although you say you did
    nothing in this but appoint Germain, and that an unknown did
    this great benefit, we must always, suppose it was you who
    founded it, as it appears to us the most natural idea. There is,
    besides, a most famous trumpet to repeat that it is you who are
    the real benefactor. This trumpet is Madame Pipelet, who repeats
    to every one that it could be no one but her king of lodgers
    (excuse her, M. Rodolph, but she always calls you so) who
    established such a charitable institution, and her old darling
    Alfred is of the same opinion; he is so proud and contented with
    his post as porter to the bank that he says all the tricks of M.
    Cabrion would not have the slightest effect on him now.

    "Germain has read in the newspapers that Martial, a colonist of
    Algeria, has been mentioned with great praise for the courage he
    had shown in repulsing, at the head of the settlers, an attack
    of plundering Arabs, and that his wife, as intrepid as himself,
    had been slightly wounded by his side, where she handled her
    musket like a real grenadier; since this time, says the
    newspaper, she has been called Madame Carabine.

    "Excuse this long letter, monseigneur, but I think you will not
    be displeased to hear from us news of all those whose benefactor
    you have been. I write to you from the farm at Bouqueval, where
    we have been since the spring with our good mother. Germain
    leaves us in the morning for his business, and returns in the
    evening. In the autumn we shall return to Paris.

    "It is so strange, M. Rodolph, that I, who could never endure
    the country, am now so fond of it; I suppose it is because
    Germain likes it so very much.

    "As to the farm, M. Rodolph, you who know, no doubt, where the
    good little Goualeuse is, will perhaps tell her that we very
    often think of her as one of the dearest and gentlest creatures
    in the world; and that, for myself, I never think of my own
    happy condition without saying to myself, since M. Rodolph was
    also the M. Rodolph of dear Fleur-de-Marie, that, no doubt, she
    is by his kindness as happy as we are, and that makes one feel
    still more happy. Ah, how I chatter! What will you say to all
    this? But you are so good, and then, you know, it is your fault
    if I go on as long and as merrily as Papa Crétu and Ramonette,
    who no longer have a chance with me in singing. You will not
    refuse our request, will you, monseigneur? If you will give a
    name to our dear little child, it will seem to us that it will
    bring her good fortune, like a lucky star.

    "If I conclude by saying to you, M. Rodolph, that we try to give
    every assistance in our power to the poor, it is not to boast,
    but that you may know that we do not keep to ourselves all the
    happiness you have given to us; besides, we always say to those
    we succour: 'It is not us whom you should thank and bless; it is
    M. Rodolph, the best, most generous person in the world.'

    "Adieu, monseigneur! And pray believe that when our dear little
    child begins to lisp, the first word she shall utter will be
    your name, M. Rodolph, and the next those you wrote on the
    basket which contained your generous wedding presents to me,
    'Labour and discretion, honour and happiness.' Thanks to these
    four words, our love and our care, we hope, monseigneur, that
    our child will be always worthy to pronounce the name of him who
    has been our benefactor, and that of all the unfortunates he
    ever knew--Forgive me, monseigneur, but I cannot finish without
    the big tears in my eyes, but they are tears of happiness.
    Excuse all errors, if you please; it is not my fault, but I
    cannot see very clearly, and I scribble.

    "I have the honour to be, monseigneur, your respectful and most
    grateful servant,

                                           "RIGOLETTE GERMAIN.

    "P.S. Ah, monseigneur, in reading my letter over again, I see I
    have often written M. Rodolph, but you will excuse me, for you
    know, monseigneur, that under any and every name we respect and
    bless you alike."

"Dear little Rigolette!" said Clémence, affected by the letter; "how
full of good and right feeling is her letter!"

"It is, indeed!" replied Rodolph. "She has an admirable disposition, her
heart is all that is good; and our dear daughter appreciates her as we
do," he added, addressing Fleur-de-Marie, when, struck by her pale
countenance, he exclaimed, "But what ails you, dearest?"

"Alas! what a painful contrast between my position and that of
Rigolette. 'Labour and discretion, honour and happiness,' these four
words declare all that my life has been, all that it ought to have
been,--a young, industrious, and discreet girl, a beloved wife, a happy
mother, an honoured woman, such is her destiny; whilst I--"

"What do you say?"

"Forgive me, my dear father; do not accuse me of ingratitude. But in
spite of your unspeakable tenderness and that of my second mother, in
spite of the splendour with which I am surrounded, in spite of your
sovereign power, my shame is incurable. Nothing can destroy the past.
Forgive me, dear father. Until now I have concealed this from you; but
the recollection of my original degradation drives me to despair--kills
me--"

"Clémence, do you hear?" cried Rodolph, in extreme distress. "Oh,
fatality--fatality! Now I curse my fears, my silence. This sad idea, so
long and deeply rooted in her mind, has, unknown to us, made fearful
ravages; and it is too late to contend against this sad error. Oh, I am
indeed wretched!"

"Courage, my dearest!" said Clémence to Rodolph. "You said but now that
it is best to know the enemy that threatens us. We know now the cause of
our child's sorrow, and will triumph over it, because we shall have with
us reason, justice, and our excessive love for her."

"And then she will see, too, that her affliction, if it be, indeed,
incurable, will render ours incurable," said Rodolph.

After a protracted silence, during which Fleur-de-Marie appeared to
recover herself, she took Rodolph's and Clémence's hands in her own, and
said in a voice deeply affected, "Hear me, beloved father, and you my
best of mothers. God has willed it, and I thank him for it, that I
should no longer conceal from you all that I feel. I must have done so
shortly, and told you what I will now avow, for I could not longer have
kept it concealed."

"Ah, now I comprehend!" ejaculated Rodolph, "and there is no longer any
hope for her."

"I hope in the future, my dear father, and this hope gives me strength
to speak thus to you."

"And what can you hope for the future, poor child, since your present
fate only causes you grief and torment?"

"I will tell you; but before I do so let me recall to you the past, and
confess before God, who hears me, what I have felt to this time."

"Speak--speak--we listen!" was Rodolph's reply.

"As long as I was in Paris with you, my dearest father, I was so happy
that such days of bliss cannot be paid for too dearly by years of
suffering. You see I have at least known happiness."

"For some days, perhaps."

"Yes, but what pure and unmingled happiness! The future dazzled me,--a
father to adore, a second mother to cherish doubly, for she replaced
mine, whom I never knew. Then--for I will confess all--my pride was
roused in spite of myself. So greatly did I rejoice in belonging to you.
If then I sometimes thought vaguely of the past, it was to say to
myself, 'I, formerly so debased, am the beloved daughter of a sovereign
prince, whom everybody blesses and reveres; I, formerly so wretched, now
enjoy all the splendours of luxury, and an existence almost royal.'
Alas! my father, my good fortune was so unlooked for, your power
surrounded me with so much brilliancy, that I was, perhaps, excusable in
allowing myself to be thus blinded."

"Excusable! Nothing could be more natural, my angelic girl. What was
there wrong in being proud of a rank which was your own, in enjoying the
advantages of a position to which I had restored you? I remember at this
time you were so delightfully gay, and said to me in accents I never can
again hope to hear, 'Dearest father, this is too, too much happiness!'
Unfortunately it was these recollections that begat in me this deceitful
security."

"Do you remember, my father," said Fleur-de-Marie, unable to overcome a
shudder of horror, "do you remember the terrible scene that preceded our
departure from Paris when your carriage was stopped?"

"Yes," answered Rodolph; in a tone of melancholy. "Brave Chourineur!
after having once more saved my life--he died--there, before our eyes."

"Well, my father, at the moment when that unhappy man expired, do you
know whom I saw looking steadfastly at me? Ah, that look--that look! it
has haunted me ever since!" added Fleur-de-Marie, with a shudder.

"What look? Of whom do you speak?" cried Rodolph.

"Of the ogress of the _tapis-franc_!" answered Fleur-de-Marie.

"That monster! You saw her!--and where?"

"Did you not see her in the tavern where the Chourineur died? She was
amongst the women who surrounded us."

"Ah, now," said Rodolph, in a tone of despair, "I understand. Struck
with horror as you were at the murder of the Chourineur, you must have
imagined that you saw something prophetic in the sinister rencontre!"

"Yes, indeed, father, it was so. At the sight of the ogress I felt a
death-like shiver, and it seemed that under her scowl my heart, which,
until then, had been light, joyous, bounding, was instantly chilled to
ice. Yes, to meet that woman at the very instant when the Chourineur
died, saying, 'Heaven is just!' it seemed to me as a rebuke from
Providence for my proud forgetfulness of the past, which I was hereafter
to expiate by humility and repentance."

"But the past was forced on you, and you are not responsible for that in
the sight of God!"

"You were driven to it--overcome--my poor child!"

"Once precipitated into the abyss in spite of yourself, and unable to
quit it in spite of your remorse and despair, through the atrocious
recklessness of the society of which you were a victim, you saw yourself
for ever chained to this den, and it required that chance should throw
you in my way to rescue you from such thraldom."

"Then, too, my child, your father says you were the victim and not the
accomplice of this infamy," said Clémence.

"But yet, my mother, I have known this infamy!" replied Fleur-de-Marie,
in a tone of deepest grief. "Nothing can destroy these fearful
recollections,--they pursue me incessantly, not as formerly, in the
midst of the peaceful inhabitants of the farm, or the fallen women who
were my companions in St. Lazare, but they pursue me even in this
palace, filled with the élite of Germany; they pursue me even to my
father's arms, even to the steps of his throne!" And Fleur-de-Marie
burst into an agony of tears.

Rodolph and Clémence remained silent in presence of this fearful
expression of unextinguishable remorse; they wept, too, for they
perceived that their consolations were vain.

"Since then," continued Fleur-de-Marie, drying her tears, "I say to
myself every moment in the day, with bitter shame, 'I am honoured,
revered, and the most eminent and venerated persons surround me with
respect and attention. In the eyes of a whole court the sister of an
emperor has deigned to fasten my bandeau on my forehead, and I have
lived in the mire of the Cité, familiar with thieves and murderers.'
Forgive me, dearest father, but the more elevated my position, the more
deeply sensitive have I been to the deep degradation into which I had
fallen; and at every homage paid me I feel myself guilty of profanation,
and think it sacrilege to receive such attentions, knowing what I have
been; and then I say to myself, 'If God should please that the past were
all known, with what deserved scorn would she be treated whom now they
elevate so high! What a just and fearful punishment!'"

"But, poor girl, my wife and I know the past; we are worthy of our rank,
and yet we cherish you."

"Because you feel for me the tenderness of a father and mother."

"But remember all the good you have done since your residence here, and
the excellent and holy institution you have founded for orphans and poor
forsaken girls! Then, too, the affection which the worthy abbess of Ste.
Hermangeld evinces towards you, ought not that to be attributed to your
unfeigned piety?"

"Whilst the praises of the abbess of Ste. Hermangeld refer only to my
present conduct, I accept it without scruple; but when she cites my
example to the noble young ladies who have taken vows in the abbey, I
feel as if I were the accomplice of an infamous falsehood."

After a long silence Rodolph resumed, with deep melancholy:

"I see it is unavailing to persuade you! Reasoning is impotent against a
conviction the more steadfast as it is derived from a noble and generous
feeling. The contrast of your past and present position must be a
perpetual punishment; forgive me for saying so, my beloved one!"

"Forgive you! And for what, my dear father?"

"For not having foreseen your excessive susceptibility, which, from the
delicacy of your heart, I should have anticipated. And yet what could I
have done? It was my duty solemnly to recognise you as my daughter; yet
I was wrong--wrong to be too proud of you! I should have concealed my
treasure, and lived in retirement with Clémence and you, instead of
raising you high, so high that the past would disappear as I hoped from
your eyes."

Several knocks were heard at this moment, which interrupted the
conversation. Rodolph opened the door, and saw Murphy, who said:

"I beg your your royal highness's pardon for thus disturbing you, but a
courier from the Prince of Herkaüsen-Oldenzaal has just arrived with
this letter, which he says is very important, and must be delivered
immediately to your royal highness."

"Thanks, good Murphy. Do not go away," said Rodolph, with a sigh, "I
shall want you presently." And the prince, closing the door, remained a
moment in the ante-room to read the letter which Murphy had brought him,
and which was as follows:

      "_My Lord_:--Trusting that the bonds of relationship existing
    between us, as well as the friendship with which you have ever
    honoured me, will excuse the boldness of the step I am about to
    take, I will at once enter upon the purport of my letter,
    dictated as it is by a conscientious desire to act as becomes
    the man your highness deigns to style his friend.

    "Fifteen months have now elapsed since you returned from France,
    bringing with you your long-lost daughter, whom you so happily
    discovered living with that mother from whom she had never been
    parted, and whom you espoused when _in extremis_, in order to
    legitimise the Princess Amelie.

    "Thus ennobled, of matchless beauty, and, as I learn from my
    sister, the abbess of Ste. Hermangeld, endowed with a character
    pure and elevated as the princely race from which she springs,
    who would not envy your happiness in possessing such a treasure?

    "I will now candidly state the purport of my letter, although I
    should certainly have been the bearer of the request it
    contains, were it not that a severe indisposition detains me at
    Oldenzaal.

    "During the time my son passed at Gerolstein he had frequent
    opportunities of seeing the Princess Amelie, whom he loves with
    a passionate but carefully concealed affection. This fact I have
    considered it right to acquaint you with, the more especially
    as, after having received and entertained my son as
    affectionately as though he had been your own, you added to your
    kindness by inviting him to return, as quickly as his duties
    would allow, to enjoy that sweet companionship so precious to
    his heart; and it is probable that my apprising you of this
    circumstance may induce you to withdraw your intended
    hospitality to one who has presumed to aspire to the affections
    of your peerless child.

    "I am perfectly well aware that the daughter of whom you are so
    justly proud might aspire to the first alliance in Europe, but I
    also know that so tender and devoted a parent as yourself would
    not hesitate to bestow the hand of the Princess Amelie on my
    son, if you believed by so doing her happiness would be secured.

    "It is not for me to dwell upon Henry's merits,--you have been
    graciously pleased to bestow your approval on his conduct thus
    far, and I venture to hope he will never give you cause to
    change the favourable opinion you have deigned to express
    concerning him.

    "Of this be assured, that whatever may be your determination, we
    shall bow in respectful and implicit submission to it, and that
    I shall never be otherwise than your royal highness's most
    humble and obedient servant,

                                          "GUSTAVE PAUL,
                            "_Prince of Herkaüsen-Oldenzaal_."

After the perusal of this letter Rodolph remained for some time sad and
pensive; then a gleam of hope darting across his mind, he returned to
his daughter, whom Clémence was most tenderly consoling.

"My dear child," said he, as he entered, "you yourself observed that
this day seemed destined to be one of important discoveries and solemn
explanations, but I did not then think your words would be so strikingly
verified as they seem likely to be."

"Dear father, what has happened?"

"Fresh sources of uneasiness have arisen."

"On whose account?"

"On yours, my child. I fear you have only revealed to us a portion of
your griefs."

"Be kind enough to explain yourself," said Fleur-de-Marie, blushing.

"Then hearken to me, my beloved child. You have, perhaps, good cause to
fancy yourself unhappy. When, at the commencement of our conversation,
you spoke of the hopes you still entertained, I understood your meaning,
and my heart seemed broken by the blow with which I was menaced, for I
read but too clearly that you desired to quit me for ever, and to bury
yourself in the eternal seclusion of a cloister. My child, say, have I
not divined your intentions?"

"If you would consent," murmured forth Fleur-de-Marie, in a faint,
gasping voice.

"Would you, then, quit us?" exclaimed Clémence.

"The abbey of Ste. Hermangeld is in the immediate neighbourhood of
Gerolstein, and I should frequently see yourself and my father."

"Remember, my child, that vows such as you would take are not to be
recalled. You are scarcely eighteen years of age, and one day you
may--possibly--"

"Oh, think not I should ever regret my choice! There is no rest or peace
for me save in the solitude of a cloister. There I may be happy, if you
and my second mother will but continue to me your affection."

"The duties and consolations of a religious life," said Rodolph, "might,
certainly, if not cure, at least alleviate the anguish of your lacerated
and desponding mind, and although your resolution will cost me dear, I
cannot but approve of it."

"Rodolph!" cried the astonished Clémence, "do I hear aright? Is it
possible you--"

"Allow me more fully to explain myself," replied Rodolph. Then
addressing his daughter, he said, "But before an irrevocable decision is
pronounced, it would be well to ascertain if nothing more suitable, both
to your inclinations and our own, could be found for you than the life
of a nun."

Fleur-de-Marie and Clémence started at Rodolph's words and manner,
while, fixing an earnest gaze on his daughter, the prince said,
abruptly:

"What think you, my child, of your cousin, Prince Henry?"

The brightest blush spread over the fair face of Fleur-de-Marie, who,
after a momentary hesitation, threw herself weeping in her father's
arms.

"Then you love him, do you not, my darling child?" cried Rodolph,
tenderly pressing her hands. "Fear not to confide the truth to your best
friends."

"Alas!" replied Fleur-de-Marie, "you know not what it has cost me to
conceal from you the state of my heart! Had you questioned me on the
subject, I would gladly have told you all, but shame closed my lips, and
would still have done so, but for your inquiry into the nature of my
feelings."

"And have you any suspicion that Henry is aware of your love?"

"Gracious heavens, dearest father!" exclaimed Fleur-de-Marie, shrinking
back in terror, "I trust not!"

"Do you believe he returns your affection?"

"Oh, no, no! I trust he does not! He would suffer too deeply."

"And what gave rise to the love you entertained for your cousin?"

"Alas, I know not! It grew upon me almost unconsciously. Do you remember
a portrait of a youth dressed as a page, in the apartments of the Abbess
de Ste. Hermangeld?"

"I know; it was the portrait of Henry."

"Believing the picture to be of distant date, I one day in your presence
remarked upon the extreme beauty of the countenance, when you jestingly
replied that it was the likeness of an ancestor who, in his youth, had
displayed an extraordinary share of sense, courage, and every estimable
quality; this strengthened my first impression, and frequently after
that day I used to delight in recalling to my mind the fine countenance
and noble features of one I believed to have been long numbered with the
dead. By degrees these reveries began to form one of my greatest
pleasures, and many an hour have I passed gazing, amid smiles and tears,
on one I fondly hoped I might be permitted to know and to love in
another world. For in this," continued poor Fleur-de-Marie, with a most
touching expression, "I well know I am unworthy to aspire to the love of
any one but you, my kind, indulgent parents."

"I can now understand the nature of the reproof you once gave me for
having misled you on the subject of the portrait."

"Conceive, dearest father, what was my confusion when I learnt from the
superior that the portrait was a living subject,--that of her nephew! My
trouble was extreme, and earnestly did I endeavour to erase from my
heart all the fond associations connected with that picture. In vain!
the pertinacity with which I strove to forget but riveted the impression
I had received; and, unfortunately, dear father, you rendered the task
of forgetting more difficult, by continually eulogising the heart,
disposition, and principles of Prince Henry."

"You loved him, then, my child, from merely seeing his likeness and
hearing his praises?"

"Without positively loving him, I felt myself attracted towards him by
an irresistible impulse, for which I bitterly reproached myself; my only
consolation was the thought that no person knew my fatal secret. For how
could I presume to love? How excuse my ingratitude in not contenting
myself with the tenderness bestowed on me by you, my father, and you,
also, dearest mother? In the midst of all these conflicting feelings I
met my cousin, for the first time, at a ball given by you to the
Archduchess Sophia; his resemblance to the portrait too well assured me
it was he; and your introducing Prince Henry to me as a near relative
afforded me ample opportunities of discovering that his manners were as
captivating as his mind was cultivated."

"It is easy to conceive, then, that a mutual passion sprung up between
you! Indeed, he won upon my regard ere I was aware of the ground he had
gained; he spoke of you so admiringly, yet so respectfully."

"You had yourself praised him so highly."

"Not more than he deserved. It is impossible to possess a more noble
nature, or a more generous and elevated character."

"I beseech you, dearest father, to spare me the fresh trial of hearing
him thus praised by you. Alas! I am already wretched enough."

"Go on, my child. I have a reason in thus extolling your cousin--I will
explain hereafter. Proceed."

"Though aware of the danger of thus daily associating with my cousin, I
felt unable to withdraw myself from the pleasure his society afforded
me; nor, spite of my implicit reliance on your indulgence, dear father,
durst I disclose my fears to you. I could then only redouble my efforts
to conceal my unfortunate attachment, and--shall I confess?--there were
moments when, forgetting the past, I gave myself up to all the dear
delights of a friendship hitherto unknown to me. But the departure of
Prince Henry from your court tore the veil from my eyes, and showed me
how truly and ardently I loved him, though not with a sister's love, as
I had made myself believe. I had resolved to open my heart entirely to
you on this subject," continued Fleur-de-Marie, whose strength seemed
utterly exhausted by her long confession, "and then to ask you what
remained for one so every way unfortunate but to seek the repose of a
cloister."

"Then, dearest daughter, let me answer the question ere you have put it,
by saying there is a prospect as bright and smiling awaits your
acceptance, as that you propose is cheerless and gloomy."

"What mean you?"

"Now, then, listen to me. It was impossible for an affection as great as
mine to be blinded to the mutual affection subsisting between yourself
and your cousin; my penetration also quickly discovered that his passion
for you amounted to idolatry; that he had but one hope, one desire on
earth,--that of being loved by you. At the time I played off that little
joke respecting the portrait, I had not the least expectation of Henry's
visiting Gerolstein. When, however, he did come, I saw no reason for
changing the manner in which I had always treated him, and I therefore
invited him to visit us on the same terms of friendly relationship he
had hitherto done. A very little time had elapsed ere Clémence and
myself saw plainly enough the cause of his frequent visits, or the
mutual delight you felt in each other's society. Then mine became a
difficult task.

"On the one hand, I rejoiced as a father that one so every way worthy of
you should have won your affection; then on the other hand, my poor dear
child, your past misfortunes forbade me to encourage the idea of uniting
you to your cousin, to whom I several times spoke in a manner very
different to the tone I should have adopted, had I contemplated
bestowing on him your hand.

"Thus placed in a position so delicate, I endeavoured to preserve a
strict neutrality, discouraging Prince Henry's attentions by every means
in my power, and yet manifesting towards himself the same paternal
kindness with which I had always treated him; and besides, my poor girl,
after a life of so much unhappiness as yours, I could not bring myself
suddenly to tear away the innocent pleasure you appeared to feel in the
company of your cousin. It was something to see you even temporarily
happy and cheerful, and even now your acquaintance with Prince Henry may
be the means of securing your future tranquillity."

"Dear father, I understand you not."

"Prince Paul, Henry's father, has just sent me this letter. While
considering such an alliance as an honour too great to aspire to, he
solicits your hand for his son, who, he states, is inspired with a
passion for you."

"Dearest father!" cried Fleur-de-Marie, concealing her face with her
hands, "do you forget?"

"I forget nothing,--not even that to-morrow you enter a convent, where,
besides, being for ever lost to me, you will pass the remainder of your
days in tears and austerity. If I must part with you, let it be to give
you to a husband who will love you almost as tenderly as your father."

"Married!--and to him, father! You cannot mean it!"

"Indeed I do; but on one condition: that directly after your marriage
has been celebrated here, without pomp or parade, you shall depart with
your husband for some tranquil retreat in Italy or Switzerland, where
you may live unknown, and merely pass for opulent persons of middle
rank. And my reason for attaching this proviso to my consent is because
I feel assured that, in the bosom of simple and unostentatious
happiness, you would by degrees forget the hateful past, which is now
only more painfully contrasted with the pomp and ceremony by which you
are surrounded."

"Rodolph is right," said Clémence. "With Henry for your companion, and
happy in each other's affection, past sorrows will soon be forgotten."

"And as I could not wholly part with you, Clémence and I would pay you a
visit each year. Then when time shall have healed your wounded spirit,
my poor child, and present felicity shall have effaced all recollections
of the past, you will return to dwell among us, never more to part."

"Forget the past in present happiness!" murmured Fleur-de-Marie.

"Even so, my child," replied Rodolph, scarcely able to restrain his
emotion at seeing his daughter's scruples thus shaken.

"Can it be possible," cried Fleur-de-Marie, "that such unspeakable
felicity is reserved for me? The wife of Henry. And one day to pass my
life between him--yourself--and my second mother!" continued she, more
subdued by the ineffable delight such a picture created in her mind.

"All--all that happiness shall be yours, my precious child!" exclaimed
Rodolph, fondly embracing Fleur-de-Marie. "I will reply at once to
Henry's father that I consent to the marriage. Comfort yourself with the
certainty that our separation will be but short; the fresh duties you
will take upon yourself in a wedded life will serve to drive away all
past retrospections and painful reminiscences; and should you yourself
be a mother, you will know and feel how readily a parent sacrifices her
own regrets and griefs to promote the happiness of her child."

"A mother! I a mother!" exclaimed Fleur-de-Marie, with bitter despair,
awakening at that word from the sweet illusion in which her memory
seemed temporarily lulled. "Oh, no! I am unworthy to bear that sacred
name! I should expire of shame in the presence of my own child, if
indeed I could survive the horrible disclosures I must necessarily make
to its father of my past life! Oh, never--never!"

"My child, for pity's sake, listen to me!"

Pale and beautiful amidst her deep distress, Fleur-de-Marie arose with
all the majesty of incurable sorrow, and, looking earnestly at Rodolph,
she said, "We forget that, ere Prince Henry made me his wife, he should
be acquainted with the past!"

"No, no, my daughter," replied Rodolph, "I had by no means forgotten
what he both ought to know and shall learn of the melancholy tale."

"Think you not that I should die, were I thus degraded in his eyes?"

"And he will also admit and feel," added Clémence, "that if I style you
my daughter, he may, without fear or shame, safely call you his wife."

"Nay, dearest mother, I love Prince Henry too truly to bestow on him a
hand that has been polluted by the touch of the ruffians of the Cité."

       *       *       *       *       *

A short time after this painful scene, the following announcement
appeared in the Official Gazette of Gerolstein:

"The taking of the veil by the most high and mighty Princess Amelie of
Gerolstein took place yesterday in the Abbey of Ste. Hermangeld, in the
presence of the reigning grand duke and all his court. The vows of the
novice were received by the right reverend and illustrious Lord Charles
Maximus, Archbishop of Oppenheim; Monseigneur Annibal André, one of the
princes of Delphes and Bishop of Ceuta, _in partibus infidelium_, and
apostolic nuncio, bestowed the salutation and papal benediction. The
sermon was preached by the most reverend Seigneur Pierre d'Asfeld, canon
of the Chapter of Cologne, and count of the Holy Roman Empire. _Veni
Creator Optime!_"




CHAPTER III.

THE VOWS.


    _Rodolph to Clémence._

                               GEROLSTEIN, 12th January, 1842.

      Your assurance that your father is better induces me to hope
    you will be enabled to return here with him shortly. I dreaded
    that at Rosenfeld, situated in the midst of the woods, he would
    be exposed to the piercing cold of our rigorous winters, but,
    unfortunately, his fondness for hunting rendered all our advice
    useless.

    I entreat you, Clémence, as soon as your father can bear the
    motion of the carriage, quit that country and this habitation,
    only fit for those Germans of an iron frame whose race has now
    disappeared.

    The ceremony of our poor child's taking the vows is fixed for
    to-morrow, the thirteenth of January, the fatal day on which I
    drew my sword on my father! Alas! I thought too soon I was
    forgiven! The hope of passing my life with you and my child made
    me forget that it was she who had been punished up to the
    present time, and that my punishment was to come. And it is
    come, when, six months ago, she disclosed the double torture she
    suffered,--her incurable shame for the past, and her hopeless
    passion for Henry.

    These two sentiments became, by a fatal logic, the cause of her
    fixed resolve to take the veil. You know that we could not
    conceal from her that, had we been in her place, we should have
    pursued the same noble and courageous course she has adopted.
    How could we answer those humble words, "I love Prince Henry too
    much to give him a hand that has been touched by the bandits of
    the Cité!"

    I have seen her this morning, and though she seemed less pale
    than usual, though she said she did not suffer, yet her health
    gives me the most mortal alarm.

    Alas! This morning, when I saw beneath the veil those noble
    features, I could not refrain from thinking how beautiful she
    looked the day of our marriage; it seemed that our happiness was
    reflected on her face.

    As I told you, I saw her this morning. She does not know that
    to-morrow the Princess Juliana resigns her abbatical dignity,
    and that she has been unanimously chosen to succeed her.

    Since the beginning of her novitiate there has been but one
    opinion of her piety, her charity, and the exactitude with which
    she fulfils all the rules of the order; she even exaggerates
    their austerity. She exercises in the convent that authority she
    exercised everywhere, but of which she herself is ignorant. She
    confessed to me this morning that she is not so absorbed by her
    religious duties as to forget the past.

    "I accuse myself, dear father," said she, "because I cannot help
    reflecting that, had Heaven pleased to spare me the degradation
    that has stained my life, I might have lived happily with you
    and my husband. Spite of myself, I reflect on this, and on what
    passed in the Cité. In vain I beseech Heaven to deliver me from
    these temptations,--to fill my heart with himself; but he does
    not hear my prayers, doubtless because my life has rendered me
    unworthy of communion with him."

    "But," cried I, clinging to this faint glimmer of hope, "it is
    not yet too late; your novitiate is only over to-day; you are
    yet free. Renounce this austere life, dwell again with us, and
    our tenderness shall soften your grief."

    Shaking her head sorrowfully, she replied:

    "The cloister is, indeed, solitary for me, accustomed as I have
    been to your tender care; doubtless cruel recollections come
    over me, but I am consoled by the knowledge that I am performing
    my duty. I know that everywhere else I should be liable to be
    placed in that position in which I have already suffered so
    much. Your daughter shall do what she ought to do, suffer what
    she ought to suffer."

    Without founding any great hopes on this interview, I yet said
    to myself, "She can renounce the cloister. But as she is
    determined, I can but repeat her words, 'God alone can offer me
    a refuge worthy of himself.'" Adieu, dear Clémence! It consoles
    me to see you grieve with me, for I can say 'our' child without
    egotism in my sufferings. Often this thought lightens my sorrow,
    for you are left to me, and what is left to Fleur-de-Marie?
    Adieu again; return soon.

                                                            R.


                                    ABBEY OF STE. HERMANGELD.
                                  Four o'clock in the morning.

    Reassure yourself, Clémence! Thank God, the danger is over, but
    the crisis was terrible!

    Last evening, agitated by my thoughts, I recollected the
    paleness and languor of my poor child, and that she was obliged
    to pass almost all the night in the church in prayer.

    I sent Murphy and David to demand the Princess Juliana's
    permission to remain until the morrow in the mansion that Henry
    occupied usually; thus my child would have prompt assistance,
    and I prompt intelligence, in case that her strength failed
    under this rigorous, I will not say cruel, obligation to pass
    the whole of a cold winter's night in the church.

[Illustration: "In the Church in Prayer"
Original Etching by Mercier]

    I wrote to Fleur-de-Marie that, whilst I respected her religious
    exercises, I besought her to watch in her cell and not in the
    church. This was her reply:

       "_My dear Father_:--I thank you for this fresh proof of
       your tenderness, but be not alarmed, I am sufficiently
       strong to perform my duty. Your daughter must be guilty
       of no weakness. The rule orders it, I must submit. Should
       it cause me some physical sufferings, how joyfully shall
       I offer them to God! Adieu, dear father! I cannot say I
       pray for you, because whenever I pray to Heaven I cannot
       help remembering you in my prayers. You have been to me
       on earth what God will be, if I merit it, in heaven.
       Bless your child, who will be to-morrow the spouse of
       Heaven.

                                              "SISTER AMELIE."

    This letter, in some measure, reassured me; however I had, also,
    a vigil to keep. At nightfall I went to a pavilion I had built,
    near my father's monument, in expiation of this fatal night.

    About one o'clock I heard Murphy's voice. He came from the
    convent in order to inform me that, as I had feared, my unhappy
    child, spite of her resolution, had not had sufficient strength
    to accomplish this barbarous custom.

    At eight o'clock in the evening Fleur-de-Marie knelt and prayed
    until midnight, but, overpowered by her emotion and the intense
    cold, she fainted; two nuns instantly raised her, and bore her
    to her cell. David was instantly summoned, and Murphy came to
    me. I hastened to the convent, where the abbess assured me that
    my daughter's swoon, from which she had recovered, had been
    caused only by her weakness, but that David feared that my
    presence might seriously affect her. I feared they were
    preparing me for something more dreadful, but the superior said:

    "I assure you, monseigneur, the princess is in no danger; the
    restorative the doctor has given her has greatly recruited her
    strength."

    David soon returned. She was better, but had insisted upon
    continuing her vigil, consenting only to kneel upon a cushion.

    "She is in the church, then?" cried I.

    "Yes, monseigneur, but she will quit it in a quarter of an
    hour."

    I entered the church, and, by the faint light of a lamp, I saw
    her kneeling and praying fervently. Three o'clock struck; two
    sisters, seated in the stalls, advanced and spoke to her; she
    crossed herself, rose, and traversed the choir with a firm step,
    and yet as she passed the lamp she seemed to me deathly pale. I
    remain at the abbey until the ceremony be over. I think now it
    is useless to send this letter incomplete. I will forward it
    to-morrow, with all the details of this sad day. Adieu,
    dearest!--I am heart-broken--pity!

                                                            R.




THE LAST CHAPTER.

THE THIRTEENTH OF JANUARY.


    _Rodolph to Clémence._

      The thirteenth of January! Now a doubly sinister anniversary!
    Dearest, we have lost her for ever! All is over,--ended all. It
    is true, then, that there is a horrid pleasure in relating a
    terrible grief.

    Yesterday I was complaining of the necessity that kept you from
    me; to-day, Clémence, I congratulate myself that you are not
    here,--you would have suffered too much. This morning I was in a
    light slumber, and was awakened by the sound of bells. I started
    in affright; it seemed to me a funereal sound,--a knell! In
    fact, our daughter is dead,--dead to us! And from to-day,
    Clémence, you must begin to wear her mourning in your heart, a
    heart always so maternally disposed towards her. Whether our
    child be buried beneath the marble of the tomb or the vault of
    the cloister, what is the difference to us? Hardly eighteen
    years of age, yet dead to the world!

    At noon the profession took place, with solemn pomp, and I was
    present, concealed behind the curtains of our pew. I felt, but
    even with greater intensity, all the poignant emotion we
    underwent at her novitiate. How strange! She is adored! And they
    believe, universally, that she was attracted to a religious life
    by an irresistible vocation; and yet whilst they believed it was
    a happy event for her, an overwhelming sadness weighed down the
    spectators. There appeared in the very air, as it were, a
    doleful foreboding, and it was founded, if only half realised.

    The profession terminated, they led our child into the
    chapter-room, where the nomination of the new abbess was to take
    place, and, thanks to my sovereign privilege, I went into this
    room to await Fleur-de-Marie's return to the choir. She soon
    entered; her emotion and weakness were so excessive that two of
    the sisters supported her. I was alarmed, less at her paleness
    and the great change in her features, than at the peculiar
    expression of her smile, which seemed to me imprinted with a
    kind of secret satisfaction.

    Clémence, I say to you, perhaps we may very soon require all our
    courage,--I feel within myself that our child is mortally
    smitten. May Heaven grant that I am deceived, and may my
    presentiments arise only from the despairing sadness which this
    melancholy spectacle has inspired!

    Fleur-de-Marie entered the chapter-room, all the stalls were
    filled by the nuns. She went modestly to place herself last on
    the left-hand side, still leaning on the arm of one of the
    sisters, for she yet appeared very weak.

    The Princess Juliana was seated at the end of the apartment,
    with the grand prioress on one side and another dignitary on the
    other, holding in her hand the golden crozier, the symbol of
    abbatial authority. There was profound silence; and then the
    lady abbess rose, took the crozier in her hand, and said, in a
    voice of great emotion:

    "My dear daughters, my great age compels me to confide to
    younger hands this emblem of my spiritual power," and she
    pointed to the crozier. "I am authorised by a bull of our holy
    father; I will, therefore, present to the benediction of
    monseigneur the Archbishop of Oppenheim, and to the approbation
    of his royal highness the grand duke our sovereign, whosoever of
    my dear daughters shall be pointed out by you to succeed me.
    Our grand prioress will inform you of the result of the
    election, and she who has been chosen will receive my crozier
    and ring."

    I did not take my eyes off my daughter. Standing up in her
    stall, her two hands folded over her bosom, her eyes cast down,
    and half covered by her white veil and the long folds of her
    black gown, she was pensive and motionless, not supposing for a
    moment that she would herself be elected, as this fact had been
    communicated by the abbess to no one but myself.

    The grand prioress took a book and read:

    "Each of our dear sisters having been, according to the rule,
    requested a week since to place her vote in the hands of our
    holy mother, and keep her choice secret until this moment, in
    the name of our holy mother I declare to you, my dear, dear
    sisters, that one of you has, by her exemplary piety, merited
    the unanimous suffrages of the community, and that she is our
    sister Amelie, the most noble and puissant Princess of
    Gerolstein."

    At these words a murmur of pleased surprise and satisfaction
    went around the apartment; the eyes of all the nuns were fixed
    on my daughter with an expression of tender sympathy, and, in
    spite of my painful forebodings, I was myself deeply touched at
    this nomination, which, done isolatedly and secretly, had yet
    presented such an affecting unanimity.

    The abbess continued, in a serious and loud voice:

    "My dear daughters, if it be, indeed, Sister Amelie whom you
    think the most worthy and most deserving of you all,--if it be
    she whom you recognise as your spiritual superior, let each of
    you reply to me in turn, my dear daughters."

    And each nun replied in a clear voice:

    "Freely and voluntarily I have chosen, and I do choose, Sister
    Amelie for my holy mother and superior."

    Overcome by inexpressible emotion, my poor child fell on her
    knees, clasped her hands, and remained so until each vote was
    declared. Then the abbess, placing the crozier and the ring in
    the hands of the grand prioress, advanced towards my daughter to
    take her hand and conduct her to the abbatial seat.

    "Rise, my dear daughter," said the abbess; "come and assume the
    place that belongs to you. Your virtues, and not your rank, have
    obtained for you the position you have gained."

    Fleur-de-Marie, trembling, advanced a few steps, and said:

    "Pardon me, holy mother, but I would speak to my sisters."

    "Then first place yourself, my dear child, in your abbatial
    seat," said the princess; "it is from thence your voice shall be
    heard."

    "That place, holy mother, never can be mine!" replied
    Fleur-de-Marie, in a low and tremulous voice.

    "What mean you, my dear daughter?"

    "So high a dignity was not made for me, holy mother."

    "But the wishes of all your sisters call you to it."

    "Permit me, holy mother, to make here, on my knees, a solemn
    confession; and my sisters will see, and you, also, holy mother,
    that the humblest condition is not humble enough for me."

    "This arises from your modesty, my dear child," said the
    superior, with kindness, believing that the unhappy girl was
    giving way to a feeling of overdelicacy.

    But I divined the confession Fleur-de-Marie was about to make,
    and, greatly alarmed, I exclaimed, in a voice of entreaty:

    "My child, I conjure thee--"

    It is impossible, my dearest Clémence, to describe the look
    which Fleur-de-Marie gave me. In an instant she understood all,
    and saw how deeply I should share in the shame of this horrible
    revelation. She comprehended that after such a confession they
    might accuse me of falsehood, for I had always made it out that
    Fleur-de-Marie had never left her mother. At this reflection the
    poor dear child thought she would be guilty of the blackest
    ingratitude towards me; she had not power to continue, but bowed
    down her head, overcome--overwhelmed.

    "Again I assure you, my dear child," said the abbess, "your
    modesty deceives you. The unanimity of the choice of your
    sisters proves how worthy you are to replace me. It is not the
    princess--it is Sister Amelie who is elected. For us your life
    began on the day when you first put foot in this house of the
    Lord, and it is this exemplary and holy life that we recompense.
    I will say more, my dear daughter; if before you entered this
    retreat your life had been as wrong as it has been, on the
    contrary, pure and praiseworthy, the heavenly virtues of which
    you have given me an example since your abode here would expiate
    and ransom, in the eyes of the Lord, any past life, however
    culpable. And now, my dear daughter, judge if your modesty ought
    not to be reassured."

    These words of the abbess were, as you may think, my Clémence,
    the more precious for Fleur-de-Marie, as she believed the past
    ineffaceable. Unfortunately, this scene had deeply moved her,
    and, although she affected calmness and serenity, I saw that her
    features altered in a most distressing manner.

    "I believe I have convinced you, my dear daughter," said the
    Princess Juliana; "and you will not cause so great a grief to
    your sisters as to refuse this mark of their confidence and
    affection?"

    "No, holy mother," she said, with an expression which struck me,
    and in a voice more and more feeble, "I think now I may accept;
    but as I feel myself fatigued and in pain, if you will permit
    it, holy mother, the ceremony of the consecration shall not
    take place for a few days."

    "As you wish, my dear daughter; but in the meanwhile, until your
    dignity is blessed and consecrated, take this ring, come to your
    place, and our dear sisters will do you homage according to our
    rules."

    And the superior, putting the pastoral ring on Fleur-de-Marie's
    finger, led her to the abbatial seat. It was a simple and
    touching sight. Supported on one side by the grand prioress,
    bearing the golden crozier, and on the other by the Princess
    Juliana, each of the sisters, as she passed by, made obeisance
    to our child, and respectfully kissed her hand. But judge of my
    affright when she swooned before the procession of the sisters
    was terminated. David had not quitted the convent, and he
    hastened to the abbess's apartment, whither we had conveyed her,
    and then attended to her.

    The superior having returned to close the sitting of the
    chapter, I remained alone with my daughter. After looking at me
    for some time, she said:

    "My dear father, can you forget my ingratitude? Can you forget
    that at the moment when I was about to make my painful
    confession--when you implored me--"

    "Silence! I beseech you!"

    "And I did not reflect," she continued, with bitterness, "that,
    in telling in the face of all the world from what an abyss of
    depravity you had rescued me, I revealed a secret which you had
    preserved out of tenderness to me! It would have been to accuse
    you publicly--you, my father--of a dissimulation, which you only
    resigned yourself to to assure me a brilliant and honoured
    existence! Can you ever forgive me?"

    Instead of replying, I pressed my lips on her forehead; she felt
    my tears flow. Having kissed my hands many times, she said:

    "Now I feel better, and, as now I am dead to the world, I should
    like to make a few bequests in favour of several persons; but as
    all I have comes from you, do you authorise me, dearest father?"

    "Say, dearest, and I will do all you desire."

    "I should wish my beloved mother to keep always in the little
    boudoir in which she usually sits my embroidery-frame, with the
    work I began."

    "It shall be so, love; your apartment is as when you left it.
    Clémence will be deeply touched by your thought of her."

    "As for you, dear father, take, I pray, my large ebony armchair,
    in which I have thought of--reflected upon so much."

    "I will put it beside my own, in my own private closet, and will
    imagine I see you in it every day, where you have so often sat,"
    I said, unable to repress my tears.

    "And now I would leave some souvenirs to those who took so much
    interest in me when I was unhappy. To Madame Georges I would
    give the writing-desk I have lately used; she taught me to write
    originally, so the gift will be very appropriate," she said,
    with her sweet smile. "As to the venerable curé of Bouqueval,
    who instructed me in religion, I intend for him the beautiful
    crucifix in my oratory."

    "Very well, my dearest child."

    "I should like to send my bandeau of pearls to my good little
    Rigolette; it is a simple ornament which she may wear in her
    beautiful black hair. And as you know where Martial and La Louve
    are in Algeria, I should like to send to the brave woman who
    saved my life my gold enamelled cross. These different
    keepsakes, dearest father, I would have sent to them 'from
    Fleur-de-Marie.'"

    "I will do all you wish,--I will not forget one."

    "I am sure you will not, dearest father."

    "Is there no other person present to your memory?"

    The dear child understood me, and pressed my hand, whilst a
    slight blush tinged her pale cheeks as I said, "He is
    better--out of danger."

    "And his father?"

    "Better as his son is better. And what will you give to Henry? A
    souvenir from you will be a consolation so dear and precious!"

    "My father, offer him my _prie-Dieu_. Alas! I have often watered
    it with my tears when begging from Heaven for strength to forget
    Henry, as I was unworthy of his love."

    "How happy it will make him to see that you have had one thought
    of him!"

    "As to the asylum for the orphans and young girls abandoned by
    their parents, I should wish, my dear father, that--"

    Here Rodolph's letter was broken off by these words, almost
    illegible:

    "Clémence, Murphy will conclude this letter! I am lost,--bereft
    of sense! Ah, the thirteenth of January!"

At the end of this letter Murphy had written as follows:

      _Madame_:--By the order of his royal highness I complete this
    sorrowful recital. The two letters of monseigneur will have
    prepared your royal highness for the overwhelming news I have to
    communicate. Three hours since, whilst monseigneur was writing
    to your royal highness, I was waiting in the antechamber for a
    letter to be despatched by a courier, when suddenly I saw the
    Princess Juliana enter in the greatest consternation.

    "Where is his royal highness?" she said to me, in an agitated
    voice.

    "Writing to the grand duchess," I replied.

    "Sir Walter," she said, "you must inform monseigneur of a
    terrible event. You are his friend,--you should tell him; from
    you the blow may be less terrible!"

    I understood all, and thought it most prudent to charge myself
    with the distressing intelligence. The superior having added
    that the Princess Amelie was sinking gradually, and that
    monseigneur must hasten to receive his daughter's last sigh, I
    went into the duke's room, who saw how pale I was.

    "You have some bad news for me?"

    "Terrible, monseigneur! But courage! Courage!"

    "Ah, my forebodings!" he exclaimed; and, without adding a word,
    he ran to the cloisters. I followed him.

    From the apartment of the superior, the Princess Amelie had been
    conveyed to her cell, after her last interview with monseigneur.
    One of the sisters watched over her, and at the end of an hour
    she perceived that the Princess Amelie's voice, who spoke to her
    at intervals, was weaker, and more and more oppressed. The
    sister hastened to inform the superior, who sent for Doctor
    David, who administered a cordial; but it was useless, the pulse
    was scarcely perceptible. He saw with despair that the
    reiterated emotions having probably exhausted the little
    strength of the Princess Amelie, there was not a hope of saving
    her left. Monseigneur arrived at this moment. The Princess
    Amelie had just received the last sacrament; a slight degree of
    consciousness remained. In one hand, crossed over her chest, she
    held the remains of her little rose-tree.

    Monseigneur fell on his knees at the foot of the bed, and
    sobbed, "My child! My beloved child!" in a voice of piercing
    agony. The Princess Amelie heard him, turned her head a little
    towards him, opened her eyes, tried to smile, and said, in a
    faint voice, "My dearest father, pardon!--Henry, too!--and my
    beloved mother!--pardon!"

    These were her last words. After a slight struggle of one hour,
    she rendered her soul to God.

    When his daughter had breathed her last sigh, monseigneur did
    not say a word; his calmness and silence were frightful. He
    closed the eyelids of the princess, kissed her forehead several
    times, took piously from her hands the relics of the little
    rose-tree, and left the cell. I followed him, and he returned to
    the house outside the cloister, when, showing me the letter he
    had commenced writing to your royal highness, and to which he in
    vain endeavoured to add a few words, for his hand trembled too
    convulsively, he said to me, "I cannot write! I am crushed! My
    senses are gone! Write to the grand duchess that I have no
    longer a daughter!"

    I have executed the orders of monseigneur. May I be allowed, as
    his old servant, to entreat your royal highness to hasten your
    return as soon as the health of M. d'Orbigny will permit?
    Nothing but the presence of your royal highness can calm
    monseigneur's despair. He will watch his daughter's remains
    every night until the day when she is to be buried in the
    grand-ducal chapel.

    I have accomplished my sad task, madame. Deign, to excuse the
    incoherence of this letter, and to receive the expression of
    respectful devotion with which I have the honour to be

                Your royal highness's most obedient servant,
                                                WALTER MURPHY.

On the evening before the funeral of the Princess Amelie, Clémence
arrived at Gerolstein with her father. Rodolph was not alone on the day
of Fleur-de-Marie's interment.


THE END.


       *       *       *       *       *
Transcriber's Notes:


This e-text was prepared from numbered edition 505 of the 1000 printed.

Minor punctuation and capitalization corrections have been made without
comment.

Minor typographical errors of single words, otherwise spelled correctly
throughout the text have been made without comment.

Word Variations appearing in the original text which have been retained:

"ante-room" (1) and "anteroom" (1)
"death-like" (1) and "deathlike" (1)
"for ever" (1) and "forever" (1)
"protégés" (1) and "protégées" (1)
"work-girl" (1) and "workwoman" (1)

Throughout the text, illustrations and their captions were placed on
facing pages. For the purpose of this e-text these pages have been
combined into one entry.

Footnotes, originally at the bottom of a printed page, have been placed
directly below the paragraph in which their anchor symbol appears.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Mysteries of Paris, Volume 6 of 6, by
Eugène Sue

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MYSTERIES OF PARIS, V.6 ***

***** This file should be named 33805-8.txt or 33805-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/3/8/0/33805/

Produced by David Edwards, Christine Aldridge and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
(Stanford University, SUL Books in the Public Domain)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
